+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
[^p. 396]

## 01
1 [^1-5]. On the third (Tithi) of the third bright fortnight after his birth, the father should have the child bathed in the morning, and after sunset he should, holding up his joined hands, towards the auspicious directions (of the horizon), worship the moon.

[^1-5]: 3, 1-5 = Gobhila II, 8, 1-7.

## 02
2. The mother, having dressed (the son) in a clean (garment), should hand him, with his face turned to the north, to the father.

## 03
3. She then should pass behind (her husband's) back, and should station herself towards the north.

## 04
4. After he has performed worship (to the moon) with the three (verses), 'Thy heart, O thou with the well-parted hair' (MB. I, 5, 10 seqq.), and has handed over the son, turning him towards the north, to his mother, he should pour water out of his joined hands with (the verse), 'What in the moon' (l.l. 13).

## 05
5. (He should do the same) twice silently.

## 6 
6 [^6-12]. After a period of ten nights, or of a hundred nights, or of one year after (the child's birth) he should give him a name.

[^6-12]: 6-12 = II, 8, 8-17.

## 07
7. He who is going to perform (that ceremony-the father or a representative of the father), after he

[^p. 397]

has had the boy bathed, should sit down, and the mother, having dressed him in a clean (garment), should hand him, with his face turned to the north, to the performer (of the ceremony).

## 08
8. She then should walk around behind (his) back and should sit down towards the north.

## 09
9. He should sacrifice and should touch the sense-organs at (the boy's) head with the (Mantra), 'Who art thou?' (MB. I, 5, 14, 15.)

## 10
10. 'N.N.!' - (at the place thus indicated in the Mantra) he should give him a name.

## 11
11. The same (he should pronounce) at the end of the Mantra.

## 12
12. He should tell it to the mother first.

## 13 
13 [^13-15]. (The father) when returning from a journey, should grasp (with his two hands) his son round the head, with (the verses), 'From limb by limb' (MB. I, 5, 16-18).

[^13-15]: 13-15 = II, 8, 21-25.

## 14
14. With (the formula), 'With the cattle's' (l.l. 19), he should kiss him.

## 15
15. Silently (he should do the same) with a daughter.

## 16 
16 [^16-33]. In the third year the tonsure (of the child's head is performed).

[^16-33]: 16-33 = II, 9.

## 17
17. There the barber, warm water, a mirror, or a

[^p. 398]

razor of Udumbara-wood, and (Darbha)-blades (ate placed) towards the south.

## 18
18. A bull's dung and a mess of boiled rice with sesamum seeds which may be more or less cooked, to the north;

## 19
19. And the mother with the son in her lap.

## 20
20. (The performer of the ceremony), after having sacrificed, should look, with (the Mantra), 'Hither has come' (MB. I, 6, 1), at the barber, fixing his thoughts on (the god) Savit.

## 21
21. With (the Mantra), 'With warm water' (l.l. 2), he should look at the warm water, fixing his thoughts on Vâyu.

## 22
22. With (the Mantra), 'May the waters' (l.l. 3), he moistens (the boy's hair).

## 23
23. With (the Mantra), 'Vishu's (l.l. 4), he should look at the mirror or at the razor of Udumbara-wood.

## 24
24. With (the Mantra), 'Herb!' (l.l. 5) he puts seven Darbha-blades, with their points upwards (i.e. towards the boy's head?), into (his hair).

## 25
25. With (the formula), 'Axe!' (l.l. 6) (he presses them down) with the mirror or with the razor of Udumbara-wood.

## 26
26. With (the Mantra), 'With which Pûshan' (l.l. 7), he should move forward (the razor) three

[^p. 399]

times towards the east on the right side (of the boy's hair).

## 27
27. Cutting (the hair) once with a razor of metal he should throw the hair on the bull's dung.

## 28
28. The same rites, beginning from the moistening (of the hair, are repeated) on the left side and on the back side (of the child's head).

## 29
29. Grasping (with his two hands) the boy round his head he should murmur (the verse), 'The threefold age' (l.l. 8).

## 30
30. Walking away (from the fire) in a northern direction he should have the arrangement of (the boy's) hair made according to the custom of his Gotra and of his family.

## 31
31. Let them bury the hair in the forest.

## 32
32. Some throw them on a bunch (of grass or the like).

## 33
33. A cow constitutes the sacrificial fee.

