+++
title = "Prayer to the Sun, identified with Indra and with Vishṇu."

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

Book XVII.

⌊**Prayer to the Sun, identified with Indra and with Vishṇu.**⌋

⌊This is the fifth book of the third grand division (books xiii.-xviii.)
of the Atharvan collection, and its unity of subject (as indicated by
the title, above, which is slightly modified from Whitney's, p. 806) is
sufficiently apparent. It is the only book of the entire collection that
consists of a single *anuvāka*. At xix. 23. 27, it is called the
Viṣāsahi (*viṣāsahyāí svā́hā:* note the singular number); and the Old
Anukr., as noted below at page 812, gives it the same designation. As
was true of the preceding book (see page 792), no translation of this
book has been published by the translators of single books; but from
here on to the end of xx. 37 we have the *bhāṣya*.

⌊The Atharvaṇīya-paddhati, in a chapter on *veda-vratas* (note to Kāuś.
57. 32), nominates a *viṣāsahi-vrata;* and the same *vrata* is mentioned
by Keśava, in his note to Kāuś. 42. 12, p. 344²⁴, together with the
*śiro-vrata*, which latter is known as a necessary preliminary to the
study of the "Shaveling Upanishad" (see Muṇḍaka, iii. 2. 10). "Doubtless
this hymn figured prominently in it" \[the *viṣāsahi-vrata*\], says
Bloomfield, in his part of the *Grundriss*, p. 95.⌋

⌊The hymn consists of just 30 verses: and so again we find the
decad-division,—here into three precise decads. This, however, is a
mechanical division. Structurally, the hymn is composed of five parts,
as follows.⌋

⌊**Part I., verses 1-5.**—This is a sequence of 5 verses of 6 pādas each
and of the scheme 8 + 8: 8 + 12: 8 + 8 = 52. All 5 verses are identical
in the first 5 pādas, which are made up mostly of words containing the
roots *sah* 'overpower' and *ji* 'win by conquest'; and they differ only
in the sixth pāda, which is characterized by the phrase 'may I be'
(*bhūyāsam*), with an *ūha* which makes vs. 1 fall short of the full
tale of syllables and makes an overplus for vs. 5.⌋

⌊**Part II., verses 6-19.**—This is a sequence of 14 verses
characterized by the refrain 'Thine, O Vishnu ' (*távéd viṣṇo*). It is a
curious fact that the mss. do not separate this refrain from the stock
of the verse by an *avasāna*-mark; and herein they are supported by the
Anukr. (see below), which describes verses \[1-8: that is, 1-5 of Part
I. and\] 6-8, 10-13, 16, 18-19, and 24 as *try-avasāna*. In all the
*taved viṣṇo* verses (6-19, and 24), the Bombay ed. follows the mss.:
the Berlin ed., on the other hand, inserts an *avasāna*-mark before the
*taved;* and, so far as the sense and structure go, it is imperatively
demanded.—All the vss. of this part are of 7 pādas except 9, 14-15, and
17, which are of 5 each, and except 10, which is of 8.⌋



⌊**Part III., verses 20-23.**—This consists of 4 bits of prose. The
verses contain: praise and prayer to the Sun (20-21: 'brilliant art
thou; may I be brilliant'); and homage to the Sun, rising, setting, etc.
(22-23: *namas*).⌋

⌊**Part IV., verses 24-26.**—These are 3 perfectly regular *anuṣṭubh*
verses, to the first of which is added the *anuṣan̄ga* that is
characteristic of Part II. The 3 verses are closely related and are
addressed to the Sun as Āditya or Sūrya, the first and last being
appropriate for use at sunrise, and the second for use at sundown.—It
may be noted that of the Pali *paritta* verses (Jātaka, ii. p. 33-35)
cited in the introduction to iii. 26, one set is used at sunrise and the
other at sundown.⌋

⌊**Part V., verses 27-30.**—These (if we disregard the palpably
intrusive *bráhmaṇā* of 27 **a**) are 4 perfectly regular stanzas, of
which all the pādas are *triṣṭubh* except 30 **a** and 30 **c**, which
are *jagatī* in count and cadence. We might call them *paritta*-vents,
charms for defense and protection; they show various derivatives of the
roots *vṛ* and *gup*, and references to Kaśyapa (see note to iv. 20.
7).⌋
</details>
