+++
title = "2 The Adhana, Setting the Fires for Srauta Agni-hotra"

+++

A Vedic student’s guru, usually his father or grandfather, determines the tex tual selection and pace of learning Veda. Parents select marriage partners  when they are still children, sometimes even at birth. These two decisions,  instruction schedules and marriage, are not personal ones. A commitment to  set the fires for a career as agni-hotrin and co-sacrificing wife is different, and  is perhaps the single most important decision in the lives of a Veda pandit and  his spouse. It must be undertaken jointly and with deep consideration. This  giant step expands upon a lifelong intimacy with fire that began for the boy  with Agni maintenance as a brahmacarin. Now the liaison takes the form of  twice-daily milk offerings and a demand for shared caretaker roles of constant  fire tending with the proper implements.4 

Small wonder that few pandits and wives project the hope of performing  adhana, and still fewer actually go through with the ritual. One act of commit ment is a three-day performance of vaisa-deva as a transition from domestic to  srauta ritual life, a series of offerings to the All-gods to be described later under 

Becoming Agni 191 

the catur-masya (part 6 of this chapter). Often the adhana is put off time and  again until late middle age or beyond. Lanka, the foremost regional authority  on srauta, delayed until his late forties and was prodded along by his son-in law, Mitranarayana, who had set the fires at age twenty-two, two years earlier  than his own father. Lanka, not the son of an ahitagni like Mitranarayana, had  to sacrifice two animals in penance prior to adhana. Kapilavayi Rama Sastri  is waiting until a retirement pension from TTD service begins, economic  independence being a serviceable explanation for delay. Duvvuri Sarvesvara,  Yajulu’s eldest son, considered adhana late in life, his career being devoted  to the worship of Siva and recitations of Puranas. He finally announced in  2007 that he would establish hearths and proceed to agni-stoma, a change of  heart perhaps prompted by his younger brother, Surya Prakasa Avadhani, long  ready to open this ritual gate, but one who could not proceed until Sarvesvara’s  sibling blockade was cleared away. Looming heavily in local lore is the earlier  generation’s case of Kapilavayi Yajnesvara Agnihotra Sastri, never able to per 

form srauta rituals because his older brother, Pedda Rama Sastri, had not set  fires. Duvvuri Sarvesvara, however, never accomplished adhana. The adhana, also known as agny-adheya or adheya, is a relatively uncompli cated ritual in a special room of the sacrificer’s house. It requires a readiness  to recite scores of mantras on demand, two full days beginning on a new- or  full-moon day, usually in the spring, and four priests, adhvaryu, hotr, brahman,  and agnidhra, the last an acolyte of the brahman who is, as his name suggests,  closely connected to the ritual fires. In essence, adhana serves to “put in place”  a set of clay hearths (ayatana) that will remain as sacred center for the couple,  a cosmic, mystical space, until one of them dies. The room, not visible to out siders, is entered twice daily for offerings and other times for fireplace mainte nance. It should be large enough to seat four rtvij for isti. Three hearths are the  focus of ritual action with a storage area (vedi) nestled between them. Another  pair of hearths has outlying placement for this performance: the sabhya and  avasathya are seldom re-employed. (See Plan 2.2. Ground plan of five fires for  adhana.) Four are on the west-east line across the agni-hotra room with the  daksina fire slightly to the south. The temporary sabhya and avasathya fires  continue the eastward line outside the house. 

ApSS 5.1–25 provides the program followed in Konasima. Determination  of a proper asterism to govern the ritual must be done and this is a matter  of some controversy in the Sutras.5 The first day is devoted to bathing and  nail-trimming the couple, shaving and tonsuring the yajamana, and obtain 

ing sacrificial materials (sambhara). These include fire-sticks of various woods  and several kinds of earth for hearth foundations collected in pots and bas kets. Hearths are then shaped out of wet clay on the floor. The clay hearths 

  

Plan 6.1. Ground plan of an agni-ksetra “field of fire” projection of agni-hotra fires  outside the house for an extended srauta ritual, drawn by Kapilavayi Venkatesvara,  Simhacalam 2014, courtesy of M. V. Krishnayya.

Becoming Agni 193 

of coastal Andhra usually have a softly contoured low profile, unlike the high,  sharper edged configurations of western India. 

Just west of the garha-patya, a fire is either churned or brought directly  from the aupasana household fire; over it the adhvaryu cooks rice in water or  milk. Again, it is important to remember that rice is “food” and without the  help of Agni this life-sustaining substance is inedible. A  portion is offered  to this brahmaudanika fire and four plates are distributed so the priests may  eat. Ashes of this temporary fire are cleared away and each hearth receives  sprinkled water, then layers of sand, the collected soil (from a termite mound,  a rat burrow, a boar rutting, and pond clay), the collected twigs of five different  woods (asvattha, udumbara, parna, sami, and from any tree burned by light ning), and finally, as crowning layer, a piece of gold. The couple stays awake  all night. As the sun rises the adhvaryu and agnidhra, in the presence of a  horse,6 heat the two fire-igniting arani, ritually present them to the sacrificer,  then churn fire by pulling the rope back and forth, twirling the upright male  spindle (pramantha) held in place between the wood blocks. A spine-tingling  moment occurs, visualization of the first flame curling up from bone-dry  wood shavings on the female block. 

TB 1.2.1.15–16 is recited during this mystical production of Jatavedas, a  constant epithet of Agni who knows all the human generations. He emerges  from the semen (retas) in this womb (yoni) of the female block secure on the  ground. A  witness to this fire drilling, one deriving little inspiration from  striking a kitchen match, may be forgiven a grip of emotion, a sense of being  transported to the first such human generation of fire, documented some  400,000  years ago. A  series of mantras from the RV and saman from the  SV (themselves drawn from the RV) accompanies these steps. For example,  SV 1.79, based on RV 3.29, compares Jatavedas within the kindling blocks to  the human embryo in the womb. Phrases from the TA also declare homolo gies between the priests, ritual apparatus, and abstract powers such as speech,  mind, and breath. Every opportunity is taken to employ correspondences  (nidana, bandhu) proclaiming all the cosmic dimensions of Agni ritually  brought to this household as the foundation of an advanced sacred career. 

Now comes the all-important transfer of the newly kindled fire onto the  layered hearths, the adhvaryu taking a fire pan to the garha-patya first and then  to the ahavaniya, as the agnidhra priest next moves embers from the freshly  lighted garha-patya onto the daksinagni. The sacrificer recites auspicious  names of Agni and dispatches inauspicious, even destructive powers of the  god in the direction of an enemy, bhratrvya, or rival, sapatna. In subsequent  rituals this adversary, real or imagined, will be invoked frequently, often in  astonishing ways. If he (and the enemy seems always to be male) is merely a 

[[194]]

phantom, these phrases are swiftly glossed over, but if one has a serious foe, a  rival complicating one’s ritual, political, or marital plans, that name is elevated  to the status of designated target. If that rival is suspected of using abhi-cara, black magic, special defensive measures must be taken in counter-sorcery,  often employing mantras from the Atharva Veda.7 

The adhvaryu then takes embers from the ahavaniya to light the remaining  hearths, sabhya and avasathya, until all five fires have been inaugurated. This  pentadic layout is a harbinger of the far more elaborate five-layered fire altar  of the agni-cayana ritual that may be undertaken by those who become soma 

sacrificers. In fact, the eastern direction out of the house presages extended  sacrifices in the future. The cosmos being fivefold as well as threefold, Agni is  thus omnipresent, here, now, in this home. 

The adhana celebrant next recites in praise of each of the five while the  adhvaryu bakes loaves on eight terra-cotta pans for Agni. In a ritual dice game  the yajamana wins, to no one’s surprise, with the best throw. More loaves are  baked by the adhvaryu and his crew, this time on eleven sherds dedicated first  to Agni and Visnu, then to Agni and Soma. This is the first invocation of Soma  in the new fire complex. Again these ritual acts are accompanied by elaborate  homologies between abstract agents and all the human and physical compo 

nents of sacrifice. Ritual payments are presented to all priests by the sacrificer.  The yajamana has already been called upon to recite mentally the morning and  evening formulas for agni-hotra, and now, on the following morning, with con siderable emotion, he and his wife perform the rite itself. The ritual of setting  the fires has been completed, agni-hotra has been inaugurated, and the penta 

dic array may be reduced to a normative triad, tretagni (treta-agni) three fires. Apastamba allows for the rekindling (punar-adheya or punar-adhana) of one  or more sacred fires in case of accidental extermination, a death in the family,  the loss of the arani fire-kindling woods after they have absorbed the fires, or  if both sacrificer and wife must be away and cannot take the fires with them. If  the lapse is extensive, one of three asterisms (Rohini, Punarvasu, or Anuradha)  must govern this re-establishment. ApSS 5.26–29 gives details, including a  placation of Agni by declining his name in various grammatical forms.8 
