+++
title = "7 The First Soma and Animal Sacrifice, Agni-stoma"

+++

Baballa, so often equipped with the right phrase for the occasion, drew upon his  experience as soma-yaji, soma-sacrificer, alongside his father and five soma-yaji brothers, and observed that this momentous step into agni-stoma permits the  easy progress of a bullock cart on a well-grooved road. He belonged to an elite  older generation that cherished the drinking of soma as a closed-circuit drama  demanding only the purest and most accomplished of participants to serve  the gods. As in his reluctance to accept daksina from students and his refusal  of TTD employment, he frequently turned down invitations from local and  regional pandits to be a priest in their sacrifices and accepted only the role of  sadasya who does not drink soma. His dread was the possibility of error. 

This ritual that Mitranarayana so energetically performed at age twenty two and Mitranarayana’s father-in-law Lanka later approached with some  trepidation in midlife, is known as the praise (stoma) of Agni, honoring him  with the juice of that heaven-born sacred plant soma. As noted in Chapter 2  this ritual has pride of place: yajna, the generic Sanskrit term for “sacrifice,”  is the reference in coastal Andhra to agni-stoma, almost as if there were no  other sacrifice. Also known as jyoti-stoma, the praise of light, it is a sacrifice  with a single day of pressing and offering soma but requires five busy days on  an extended sacrificial arena with the full complement of the sixteen priests  listed in Table 2.3 of Chapter 2. As the procedure for the two lunar isti offer 

ings became the model for all sacrifices except soma and animal, so agni-stoma became the template for all additional soma sacrifices. A least one full year of  agni-hotra is required of the householder pair before undertaking agni-stoma,  

although, as mentioned earlier, a few pandits abbreviated that schedule.28 This paradigmatic rite is an elaborate drama with thousands of prepara tions, major and minor offerings, chants, and recitations. Apastamba devotes  106 chapters to agni-stoma (ApSS 10.1 to 13.25), more attention than given to  any other ritual. Another twenty-eight chapters (7.1–28) cover the independent  pasu-bandha, the animal sacrifice, an analogue being a prominent feature of  agni-stoma. And of course authorities squabble over which of their hefty com pendia of inherited instructions will govern each procedure. There is space  here only for selected highlights. In order to appreciate the spectacle of an  ahitagni’s first soma and animal sacrifice, however, one must envision the  stage, essentially a projection of the householders’ agni-hotra room outdoors  onto a spacious maha-vedi or great altar, including an agni-ksetra, field of fire.  Orientation is extremely important, the eastern compass point being the pri mary direction.

Becoming Agni 211 

In Plan 6.1 of this chapter, Kapilavayi Venkatesvara (KV) has drawn four  rectangles to represent bamboo sheds over essential areas. Observing the  chart’s alignment from west (W) to east (E) these are the prag-vamsa, sadas,  havir-dhana, and uttara-vedi. Measurements are done with the body of the  yajamana as scale: the aratni yardstick or measuring rope is one-fifth of his  height and two sacrificial poles, the audumbari in the center of the sadas and  the yupa, a vata tree on the east border for the animal sacrifice, are exactly his  height. For the agrayana harvest sacrifice a bamboo-and-straw-mat hut was  constructed just outside the house and fires were transferred there. The same  arrangement is made for agni-stoma except now the venue is an out-of-season  crop field borrowed for the occasion, dimensions are far larger, and roofed  structures for fires and participants are erected during initial days. 

First is the prag-vamsa (or pracina-vamsa), a bamboo pole-and-rafter shelter  to cover the three fires maintained in their house by the co-sacrificing husband  and wife, these fires now being shifted outdoors onto brick hearths. The wife’s  corner (patni-sala) is in the southwest within reach of the cooking fire (round  garha-patya) as well as daksina-agni (D-shaped southern fire). The square on  Plan 6.1 on the east side (E) of the prag-vamsa represents the ahavaniya offer 

ing fire. South of the ahavaniya is the initial place of the mancam, a Telugu  word for the movable bed that carries soma stalks, a litter conveyance also  known as a bandi, cart, or asandi, throne. Doors to enter and exit the shelter  are on the W to E line. 

Next built is the sadas (or sadasya), erected to cover six priests (named S  to N the maitra-varuna, hotr, brahmanac-chamsin, potr, nestr, and acchavaka).  They work at six dhisniya,29 fires ignited on low mud brick hearths, facing east  (E) during the chanting of twelve stotra and reciting of twelve follow-up sastra.  Flanking the sadas are two more fires ignited on raised earth excavated from a  pit (catvala) dug off the northeast corner of the agni-ksetra. On the north (N) is  the agnidhriya for the agnidhra, a kindling priest who distributes embers to  various hearths and tends all fires. His fire makes the total of dhisniya seven.  The other is the marja-liya for symmetry on the south side, a kind of kitch enette meant for cleaning implements. A rubbish dump, the utkara, is dug  to collect debris such as used grasses and other sweepings. Just west of the  dhisniya line is the audumbari pole. 

The next construction (KV’s third rectangle on Plan 6.1) is the havir-dhana,  a soma factory with roofing to protect the stalks and pressing equipment (four  stones, boards, animal skins) required for three preparations of soma. The  bed (mancam) of cuttings that was prominently placed by the offering fire in  the prag-vamsa is now carried onto the south side of the havir-dhana and read 

ied for action. (KV has placed it twice on Plan 6.1.) Four holes (uparava) are 

212 vedic voices 

excavated as sounding chambers beneath it. A curious moment occurs: the  adhvaryu and sacrificer are on hands and knees, their right arms deep in these  holes to touch fingers and test the correct depth. Earth from the holes serves  as a small mound in the southeast corner, the khara, holding soma containers,  eleven camasa (including one for the sacrificer) and twenty graha cups. The  table is now set. 

As they did the night before their adhana establishment of fires the couple  remains awake, the sacrificer in the havir-dhana and his wife in the patni-sala.  Directly east of the havir-dhana KV has marked the uttara-vedi, locus of the  main altar, a new ahavaniya offering fire. In the middle of the east border,  the farthest point east of the entire ritual field, stands the yupa, a second pole  meant to tie the animal destined for sacrifice. It is a vata tree shaped by a car 

penter into an octagonal post, exactly on the W-E line from the garha-patya fire  through the centers of all the shelters. To the north is the samitra, the place  where the samitr will smother the goat. 

The result of all this labor is a magnification of the indoor agni-hotra room,  preserving the same orientation, with a lateral spreading out of fires, now  eight on the north-south axis, six dhisniya hearths under the sadas roof plus  the two border fires. A transposition occurs among the essential three house 

hold fires: the prag-vamsa serves as a launching pad to make a garha-patya,  cooking hearth, out of the former ahavaniya offering fire. This requires a  new ahavaniya hearth to be established farther east on what is now called the  uttara-vedi. A crucial moment is the shift of that offering fire eastward to the  uttara-vedi. 

Having established the arena and its parts, our attention is now drawn to  the participants. A remarkable procedure on the first day is the diksa for the  sacrificer and wife, a consecration ritual famous in anthropology and the his tory of religions for its initiatory structure and striking symbolism of rebirth.  They sit on black antelope hides inside separate enclosures without speaking.  Their agni-hotra are suspended but in a sense they are themselves fire (ApSS  10.13.1) and are maintained only by the offerings of agni-hotra: milk and per haps ghee, a few grains cooked in milk, or curds. In other words, they are fast ing. Their fists remain clenched as if they are embryos subsisting on mother’s  milk inside their womb-like huts. They may not bathe and in the fierce heat  of April–May may scratch their heads and bodies only with an antelope horn. 

Each is bound as in the isti described earlier for lunar rites, he with  a mekhala, she with a yoktra, bonds that are loosened only when they have  advanced to a higher state with the final bath. In Jan Gonda’s words: “The  initiatory birth which implies death to profane existence enables [them] to  gain sacred knowledge and wisdom, a higher stage of existence and access 

Becoming Agni 213 

to a heavenly life.” They are in “a temporary state of higher sanctity.”30 The  wife recites the mantra she has learned: “Praying for benevolence, offspring,  good fortune, myself, in devotion to Agni, I gird myself for ritual and religious  merit.”31 The sacrificer receives a staff of fig-tree wood (udumbara) similar to  the one he used in his boyhood upanayana initiation and both don white cloth  head covering. 

This consecration readies them for soma, a deified plant with a storied past.  The mythology and cult of a mountain or heaven-grown plant that provides  poetic inspiration to priests, battle fury to warriors, and immortality to all may  be of ancient Indo-European origin. Certainly the parallel Avestan haoma and  Vedic soma cults indicate an Indo-Iranian development, a cult of drinking  *sauma associated with the warrior god Indra. A late phase of the Bactria and  Margiana Archeological Complex (BMAC) that had begun in southern Central  Asia early in the third millennium bce resulted in assembly of the RV hymns  between c. 1750 and 1500 bce. The RV remains the best source with 120 hymns  devoted to Soma, including the entire ninth mandala. RV 10.119 is Indra’s  famous boast of being high on soma and RV 4.26 and 27 depict the theft of  soma from the highest heaven by an eagle, a myth that has a sparkling legacy  in Sanskrit epics, Puranas, and other literary records as well as folklore.32 

In Konasima soma-lata is the Telugu ritual name for a common green  leafless creeper, tiga (Asclepias acida), purchased from one who harvests and  carts it into the agrahara, then faces a brutal bargaining session that drives the  reward down from a “soma-cow” to a bag of paddy. The seller is then formulai 

cally beaten out of the agrahara as the stalks are bundled in white cloth and  loaded onto a black antelope hide over the woven cords of the mancam des tined for the havir-dhana by way of the prag-vamsa. The cuttings are sprinkled  with water and pounded with stones over the uparava holes to make them  swell as the four echo chambers reverberate. Their juices flow through woolen  strainers into a wooden tub that serves as resource for all libations. Water,  ghee, milk, curds, barley, or honey may be mixed in as the juice passes from  tub to pot to cup. At one point priests form a moving serpentine line, crouch ing on haunches, each holding the shoulder of the one before, all chanting the  bahis-pavamana, a stotra about the purity and brightness of milk-blended soma arriving at the altar. They see themselves as stealthy hunters of an antelope,  stalking the very sacrifice they are now performing! 

The camasa wooden cups have been crafted by a carpenter, each with  distinctive shape or handle for the sacrificer and ten priests identified as  cupbearers (camasin). Like the soma-lata creepers themselves these cups are  believed to swell from the potent juice that is quaffed by the gods, Indra,  Agni, Vayu, the Asvin pair, and others. These swollen cups also serve the 

214 vedic voices 

ancestors, the pitr, Fathers, who arrive for their share.33 At a certain moment  in all the drinking of the remains of offerings to the deities (sacrificer and  priests are actually receiving their ucchista, leftovers), the mysterious god dess Ida, a personification of sacrificial remnants, is toasted as the eleven  camasin clink their cups together. The undiluted juice of coastal Andhra tiga is bitter. No one reports, even after the third pressing, hallucinogenic or  stimulant effects. The age of poetic inspiration from drinking soma is recol lected but not repeated. 

There are strong associations between the drinking of soma, male viril ity, and female fecundity. Lanka pointed to the very first performance of  an agni-stoma by Prajapati, lord of creatures, in order to bring life into the  world. Several brief actions reinforce the procreative goals of yajna that mir ror those of the lunar isti. The veda grass brush (“Brahma’s moustache”) that  is featured in new- and full-moon rites appears again as a transient erotic  symbol, sometimes on the lap of the sacrificer, sometimes on his wife’s lap,  and at times even hurled across the arena by her after presentation by the  sacrificer. In her diksa mantra the wife requested offspring and later she is  associated several times with water and bathing, at one point sitting with  spread legs to pour water on her thighs in reference to her fertile womb  and child-bearing capacity. Still later in the agni-stoma she will carefully  bathe the sacrificial goat. And reference to the soma seat as a bed may be an  oblique disclosure of the locus of semen production, retas being a frequent  name for soma in the Rg Veda, replaced by ghee as another homology in the  Brahmanas and ritual sutras.34 

On the agni-stoma’s single pressing day (sutya) the drinking of soma,  soma-bhaksana, occurs morning, midday, and afternoon-evening. Each  pressing-offering-drinking event may be preceded by two other types of  offerings, the pravargya and upasad. The pravargya, not necessarily part of  agni-stoma, will be discussed at length below as it is a significant ritual in and  of itself. The upasad have a history in the cosmic struggles between the gods  and the Asuras, the gods eventually winning the day and becoming masters  of the universe by laying successive sieges (upasad) to enemy redoubts and  expelling Asuras from all three worlds. Immediately following discussion of  the pravargya AB 1.4.6 relates that scene and proceeds with applications to  ritual of these paradigmatic victories. In soma rites, however, upasad have  another meaning, not assaults but reverent approaches—with multiple liba tions of ghee for Agni, Soma, and Visnu.35A special moment occurs during  the third soma pressing (cf. ApSS 13.35.6) when the udgatr and his acolytes  cover their ears and chant the yajna-yajniya saman, a string of verses drawn  from the Rg Veda.

Becoming Agni 215 

An essential part of agni-stoma is this animal sacrifice, pasu-bandha, mean ing that the menu of this feast shared with the gods includes meat as well as  cereal grain loaves and a soma-juice beverage. Like the soma narrative, animal  sacrifice has an extensive genealogy in South Asia.36 If Asko Parpola is correct  in his interpretation of the Indus “fig-deity” seal from Mohenjo-Daro as the  sacrifice of a sarabha or markhor goat (Capra falconeri) to a goddess in a tree  (“a predecessor of Durga”), goat sacrifices in South Asia may be older than any  known Vedic ritual.37 

An animal sacrifice independent of soma rites is recommended for  an agni-hotrin in the month of Sravana (July–August) and is usually called  Sravana or nirudha pasu. Few if any, however, have done this prior to complet ing agni-stoma and only the rare Konasima pandit did it more than once after  yajna. Reticence on the part of a few to discuss personal ritual history may  stem from this disjuncture since Apastamba recommends that the nirudha  pasu be sacrificed once a year or even every six months (ApSS 7.28.6). All pan dits agree, however, on the absolute necessity of animal sacrifice within soma rites, including as many as thirty-two goats for a vaja-peya. In recent years the  pasu-bandha involving large numbers of animals has often meant postponing  the ritual until the final day and performing it within the guarded compound  of a sympathetic land owner in order to avoid disturbance by animal-rights  activists. 

The pasu-bandha permits coastal Andhrans to believe that they are the sole  remaining authentic Vedic sacrificers. Some in India and Nepal substitute  vegetable for animal offerings. When shown a copy of color plate 98A in Frits  Staal’s Agni, eleven banana-leaf packages of rice flour lined up in a row as  “animals” in the 1975 Nambudiri agni-cayana in Kerala, the Sriramapuram  ahitagni laughed and asked “How can there be a sacrifice if no one dies?” They  disdain the use of pista-pasu (flour-paste) figures of animals and continue to  offer soma and a real pasu together. 

On the pressing day of agni-stoma the Agni-Somiya male goat is dedicated  to Indra and Agni. In the samitra space in the northeast corner on Plan 6.1  he is smothered rather than beheaded, as in the oldest known Vedic animal  sacrifices,38 by a Kummari, a Potter of the Sudra artisan caste taking the role of  “pacifier” (samitr), one strong enough to hold a kicking goat. “It is the mantra  that subdues the sacrificial victim; the Kummari only assists,” say the Veda  pandits. They are in agreement with the general Hindu populace—villagers  who sacrifice thousands of goats to neighborhood goddesses—that a goat is  the closest correspondent to a human body. Two legs, four legs do not mat ter: his forelegs are always called “arms.” In ancient Rome Pliny the Elder,  who was never near India, thought the elephant was closest to a human; in216 vedic voices 

India, land of elephants, an affection for the goat won the nod. In the pat tern of Vedic correspondences, sacrificer and animal victim are one. Charles  Malamoud observes, however, that the sacrificer wishes both to offer and avoid  offering the animal; if their esoteric identity were total, the result would be the  death of the sacrificer.39 

Of the many segments of a goat’s body, eleven are selected as main offer ings, the heart (hrdiya) being singled out for special ritual attention. The  most important part of the animal, however, is the omentum (vapa), as in  TS 6.3.9.5, extracted as first offering. Today in the surrounding communi ties fierce goddesses demand blood and goats are “cut” in decapitation to  feed them. Asphyxiation in Vedic pasu-bandha, on the other hand, preserves  vital powers of breath within the animal; blood, left for demons and ghosts,  is never an offering to devata. Preliminary rites in the two traditions, how ever, are identical. The he-goat is pledged as offering, tied to a post (the yupa on Plan 6.1), sprinkled with water, calmed, and prevented from bleating. The  Vedic rite is apparently emotionally conflicted, more so than the neighbor hood goddess rite. Both the Vedic sacrificer and adhvaryu (standing inside the  square marked uttara vedi on Plan 6.1) turn away during immolation (as they  avert eyes when felling the tree for the yupa). 

Several mantras are muttered including TS 3.1.4.h insisting that the animal  go as a living gift to the gods, Agni and Soma in this case. The wife’s bath ing of the dead but still warm goat is said to cause his body to swell and be  strong, like the swelling soma stalks and wooden soma cups. Of this moment  Stephanie Jamison observes that the animal, like soma, is welcomed as a guest  in “a perverted hospitality ritual” and after its suffocation “the wife as progeni tor causes the dead animal to be reborn.”40 

The omentum is knifed loose and drawn out through a hole in the abdo men and this fatty membrane, precious to Indra, is stretched across his chest  by the adhvaryu as he struts and turns to every compass point for all to inspect,  a procedure pandits admit is not in Sutras but adopted for dramatic effect.  The yajamana touches this caul-like skein of flesh said to contain the essence  (medha) of sacrifice. As Ganesh Thite has observed, it is homologized to  semen and represents his immortality.41 The adhvaryu declares TS 1.3.9.2l “For  food!” It is a stunning moment reminiscent of the now rarely seen goddess  festival known in Telugu Godavari dialect as gavu featuring a dancing male  ritualist wearing a headless split goat, the patta potu, the special one of all the  animals “sealed” to the goddess, splayed open to reveal the viscera, including  the omentum. 

In the Vedic rite the omentum is held momentarily over the samitra fire  on a long fork where it flashes brightly before it is roasted on the ahavaniya as 

Becoming Agni 217 

first offering in the morning, something of an appetizer for the gods. Several  baked dough purodasa loaves for Indra and Agni accompany the goat in the  midday soma pressing and goat limbs, butchered in the morning and either  roasted or boiled in water or ghee in a pot, are offered at the third pressing of  soma in the evening. Animal flesh and plant juice have reserved equal space  on the banquet’s menu. 

As noted in Chapter 2, the parts of the animal are avadana, specific cuts  designated as main offerings. Bulusu Cayanulu enthusiastically labeled pan dits “surgeons” supervising the work of pristine double-edged knives wielded  by the Kummari. He enjoyed the selection process: heart, roasted separately  on a spit (sula) after slicing the omentum, tongue, liver, kidneys, lungs, breast,  left foreleg, and right hindquarter. Agni Svistakrt receives second-choice  cuts: right foreleg, left hindquarter, and a portion of the lower intestine. Telugu  sensitivity about words for genitals means reluctance to discuss the fate of the  penis and testicles although Apastamba (7.26.7) allots their remnants, after  the gods’ share, to the hotr, with the agnidhra and brahman respectively receiv 

ing leftovers of the lower intestines and breast. Even the tail, a phallic symbol,  has quite a complicated denouement toward several recipients including the  patni and the wives of the gods. The Kummari returns to receive the hide  and head. The latter, supremely desired by neighborhood goddesses, has both  mythic and ritual interest to Vedic gods but the pasu-bandha Sutra authors  generally pass it over. 

Duvvuri Yajulu was apathetic toward all of this, volunteering that he  never once performed nirudha pasu-bandha because the whole process  offended him, although for soma rites his consent was mandatory. Anasuya  called him squeamish, the contrary of her husband Lanka, who was as  much invigorated by the ritual as the bright-eyed Cayanulu. Kapilavayi  Venkatesvara admitted that the sight of an animal killed by the roadside  always saddens him while a sacrificed animal is totally different: that, he  said, is a sacred act. Duvvuri Yajulu agreed, but he enjoyed most anna-dana,  a gift of vegetarian food to the entire neighborhood. “When we performed  our yajna 76 full bags of rice were consumed in seven days. Konasima,  unlike Krishna District, is famous for generosity. Without anna-dana it is  not a real yajna.” 

At the close of agni-stoma, yokes, both real and symbolic, are removed from  the bullocks, soma carts, soma-pressing materials, wife (her yoktra), sacrificer  (his mekhala) and all ropes, cords, and hides are thrown in the river along with  all implements and containers that have been touched by soma. The gods,  priests, and sacrificer have consumed soma together and no trace may remain.  Although the wife does not drink soma her funeral will nevertheless require, 

218 vedic voices 

as discussed in the final segment of this chapter, that her bones and teeth  be re-cremated because she has absorbed the sacred substance by eating her  husband’s leftover food. The sacrificer and wife step into the river, now full of  the abandoned architecture of agni-stoma, and repeatedly pour pots of water  over each other until the unnetr priest leads them out. The sacrifice and its  protective diksa are concluded, they are born anew with new names (Soma-yaji  and Somi-devamma), and are now free to resume agni-hotra and entertain  thoughts of any advanced soma rite. 
