+++
title = "3 Bulusu Cayanulu (1915–1997)"

+++

The fifty-year-old house next-to-last at the far end of the agrahara lane stood  boarded up and empty for a year to allow ghosts and demons time to clear out.  If one had to walk that way it was done quickly with averted gaze. Rituals were  done against “wind,” gali, and dust, a common Telugu expression for ghosts  and other dangerous malevolent forces. Inside the house a few cracked, dried  fragments of clay fireplaces scotched the floor. They should have been cleared  away to assure safe journey onward for the deceased house owner, but he had  died suddenly under an inauspicious constellation. After funerary procedures  the house was hastily abandoned. 

The deceased was Bulusu Vyaghresvara Cayanulu (1915–97), the third ahi tagni on the fourteen-house lane of Sriramapuram agrahara. Subbalaksmi, her  widow’s white sari draped over her cropped white hair, returned to the house  in which she had lived as a somi-devamma for more than three decades, but  stayed only a short time before moving to the spreading town of Rajahmundry  to live with a daughter and family. 

Curiously, although not unique within communities of pandits who bear  names of popular deities, ancient villages, and accomplished or wished for  rituals, there were two identically named Vaidika Brahmans of the same gotra (Gautama), born in the same tiny hamlet (Vyaghresvaram) only a few years  apart. Both became Veda pandits and then ahitagni. One remained in his  natal village all his life and became Bulusu Vyaghresvara Soma-yaji while the  other moved into Sriramapuram agrahara, performed agni-cayana, and there 

fore acquired the full name of Bulusu Vyaghresvara Cayanulu. Hereafter, this  second Vyaghresvara will be Bulusu Cayanulu to distinguish him from other  Bulusus and other Cayanulus (such as Ravi Cayanulu, a smarta Brahman neigh 

bor in Sriramapuram but neither an ahitagni nor performer of agni-cayana). Everyone in the agrahara knows the story of the ancestor of Bulusu  Cayanulu who worshipped Ganesa all his days. In his old age, one day he  was surprised by the elephant-headed god’s sudden appearance before him.  A boon was granted as reward for lifelong determined devotion: for three suc cessive purusa, generations, his descendants would be distinguished Veda  pandits. Bulusu Cayanulu represented, in this fortuitous but sharply bordered  prediction, the third and final generation. When he died in 1997 he left no vis ible direct descendant in Veda.86 vedic voices 

One of three brothers, he was the only one who became a Veda pandit.  Along with a boy of the same age, Renducintala Venkatacalu, he became a  brahmacarin student of Venkatacalu’s father. This providential association had  long-term consequences. Venkatacalu became Renducintala Yajulu, the most  famous sacrificer and promoter of srauta rituals in twentieth-century India,  one whose name is a string of thirty-some sacrifices, a veritable litany recited  with awe and admiration by most Veda pandits of Andhra. The chanting of his  name always has the ring of an ideal mantra! 

Renducintala was born in the delta. Unlike Bulusu Cayanulu, who remained  in Konasima within a few miles of his birthplace, Renducintala Yajulu spent  most of his life in Kasi (Varanasi) where he died in 1987. Frequent visits to  Andhra, mostly to a second house in Vijayawada on the Krishna River, but also  to the Godavari River Delta, kept him informed of the state of Veda and srauta 

in the territory of his birth. He and his wife, Laksmikanta, performed their  first yajna, the agni-stoma, in 1936, their last one in Kasi in 1980, and managed  more than half a century of agni-hotra over all. 

To return to Vyaghresvara (who was to become Bulusu Cayanulu), after  he and Venkatacalu completed the eighty-two panna the paths of the two  former classmates—now established Veda pandits, both married with fami lies started—intersected again when Vyaghresvara’s twenty-four-year-old  wife, Rama Suryakanta from Prakkilanka, suddenly died of typhoid fever in  1945. The musi-vayanam ritual for a wife who dies first was performed on  the tenth day by a brahma-muttaiduva, a special Brahman woman ritualist  who made the lengthy journey to Vyaghresvaram village from Rajahmundry.  The young couple’s son, Ramana Murti, was six years old. Venkatacalu, now  known as Renducintala Yajulu, wanted to recruit Vyaghresvara as rtvij in a  paundarika for his increasingly ambitious schedule of sacrifices. But a rtvij 

cannot be apatnika, without a wife. He must have married a pre-pubescent  girl in an authentic five-day vivaha. Therefore Renducintala Yajulu took on  the project of legitimizing his boyhood friend and colleague. In Gangalakurru  village he located a Brahman family willing to give fourteen-year-old daugh 

ter Subbalaksmi to a promising young pandit, although a thirty-year-old wid ower. They were married eight months after the unfortunate death of Rama  Suryakanta, and Vyaghresvara became eligible for srauta roles.5 

Subbalaksmi subsequently gave birth to three daughters, then a son, and  then a fourth daughter. (See Figure 3.7, Bulusu Cayanulu and Subbalaksmi,  Sriramapuram 1987.) Ramana Murti, the son from Vyaghresvara’s first mar riage, was raised by his grandmother in Vyaghresvaram and remained there  when the new family was invited to live in Sriramapuram, only a twenty-minute  walk through the fields. The lives of Renducintala Yajulu and Vyaghresvara 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 87   Figure 3.7. Bulusu Cayanulu and Subbalaksmi, Sriramapuram 1987.

connected yet a third time when they struck a marriage alliance. Yajulu’s son  Satyanarayana would marry Vyaghresvara’s third daughter with no demands  for dowry. In lieu of cash or land, Vyaghresvara agreed to teach this prospective  son-in-law and became Satyanarayana’s principal guru. When the boy and girl  reached respective ages of fifteen and ten, they were married in Vijayawada. 

Meanwhile, Vyaghresvara had pursued multiple career paths. In accord  with a hereditary relationship, he prepared a more rigorous program in smarta than the normal Veda pandit curriculum. This began at age fifteen and con cluded with exams three years later. Baballa’s Bhamidipati ancestors had  depended for generations upon Vyaghresvara’s Bulusu ancestors for services  as brahma (purohita) for samskara and other domestic rites. Absent from such  services would be apara, funerary rituals that called for a special Brahman.  Until his declining years prevented further service and the Bhamidipati fam ily was forced to go outside the hereditary link, Bulusu Cayanulu remained  as brahma for Baballa’s descendants. To a greater degree than any other Veda  pandit covered here, Bulusu Cayanulu, with a lifetime of experience in both  srauta and smarta, was able to articulate what he clearly understood to be a  close relationship between the two ritual traditions and the Grhya and Srauta  Sutras of Apastamba that support them. It is sometimes said by scholars that  Smarta Brahmans are sharply delineated from those who perform srauta, but  Bulusu Cayanulu was living proof otherwise. 

[[88]]

In addition to this dual profession he taught for fourteen years in a  veda-patha-sala in Billakurru, north of Vyaghresvaram on the other side of  the canal. He became an examiner in the Veda-certification process. And he  was invited regularly as rtvij in the rituals of Renducintala Yajulu and oth 

ers in Vyaghresvaram village. He estimated his participation in approximately  fifty or sixty rituals including six paundarika, often as udgatr. The srauta ethos of Konasima in the 1960s was infectious and in Magha 1965, at age  fifty, he performed adhana with agni-stoma on the following day by the side  of the little temple in Sriramapuram. And four years later, this time choos ing his natal village of Vyaghresvaram as site, he managed the sarva-prstha  agni-cayana that endowed him with the name Cayanulu. This was in 1969, the  same year in which his neighbor Duvvuri Yajulu added Paundarika to his full  name. (See Figure 3.8, Cayanulu, with Baballa behind, and others in a ritual,  Sriramapuram 1987.) 

Having founded the Sriramapuram agrahara on the right bank of the  Billakurru Canal, known more affectionately as the Kausika, the Dokka fam ily invited Vyaghresvara and Subbalaksmi to live there. A house plot plus an 

  



Figure 3.8. Bulusu Cayuanulu, Baballa behind, during a ritual, Sriramauram 1987. 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 89 

acre of cropland were the donation. His ancestral lands had been sold off,  and then his donated agricultural acre had to be sold to pay for his daughters’  dowries (with the exception of the daughter given to Renducintala in exchange  for teaching). Eventually, when the TTD parayana system kicked in, he took  up service at age sixty-one in a temple in his natal village of Vyaghresvaram,  with additional recitations in nearby Pulletikurru. His retirement came at age  seventy-eight as a vrddha pandit pensioner with seventeen years of service.  Financial worries pursued him, however, and he continued to attend sabha that brought in small honoraria. The central government in Delhi provided  honoraria for agni-stomin for some years before he learned about it, giving him  opportunity to grouse: “The other ahitagni kept this secret from me.” 

Several “felicitations” honored him, one being in Hyderabad where he was  surprised to be greeted by the prime minister of India, P. V. Narasimha Rao,  a fellow Andhra native. No one had informed him of this distinction. To be  there, the eighty-year-old man had to bounce along alone for some twenty  hours on overnight buses. The honorarium for that event was rupees amount 

ing then to $35.13. But he was delighted by the honor. Another tribute came  from the Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister, the former film star N. T. Rama Rao,  a distinction in itself, having the familiar silver-screen idol Rama or Krishna  make the presentation. 

In family album photos Bulusu Cayanulu appears in his prime as a strik ingly handsome man. He was an impulsive, naturally affectionate man, the only  ahitagni ever to reach out and grasp the dora’s hands in both of his (once only).  He was a dependable, trustworthy individual, faithful to his professional and  familial duties, sincerely devoted to his own ritual life and to the ongoing sam skara and isti of others who depended on him as expert brahma or rtvij. Srauta rituals fascinated him, the form of agni-cayana that he had accomplished in par ticular. In his later years he was preoccupied with performing the catur-masya rites, which Baballa and Lanka had done and he had planned but never followed  through. Left undone, this complex ritual weighed heavily on his mind as a  significant unfulfilled duty. The agrayana, however, he and Subbalaksmi did as  usual in February 1996 in his eighty-first year, rekindling fires with prayascitta for failing to do it as he had intended in one of the three autumnal months of  1995, and then following up with isti for the subsequent fortnight. 

Bulusu Cayanulu was not the philosopher of the adjacent agrahara. Baballa  and Lanka were sought first as authorities, then Duvvuri Yajulu. He stated  his opinions forcefully, categorically, but often they were the odd ones out in  deliberations of the group and he was dismissed as eccentric. For example,  the aim of srauta, he would insist, is the cessation of births. But before he  could elaborate he would be cut off, overridden with contrary views. And his 

[[90]]

statements were sometimes whimsical and extravagant. “In a Telangana vil lage called Manthini,” he once pronounced grandly, “there are 800 Brahman  families, all ahitagni, all ghana-pathi, and there they perform vaja-peya.” He  possessed a charming naivete. When visits to Sriramapuram occurred a week  or so apart he assumed a commute back to America had intervened. When  presented with a 1975 book by the dora, inscribed to all in the agrahara and  meant to be shared, he assumed with worried demeanor that it was about  him. It was never seen again. Cayanulu inadvertently added a capricious tenor  to conversations. In early years there was no admission to the interior of his  house, and when asked, while sitting on his arugu, about the exact location of  his agni-hotra, room he could find no way to describe it. A careful map of the  agrahara was drawn for him, including the path separating the two rows of  houses and a large empty square for his house. No amount of prodding gave  results. Finally, in desperation to locate his agni-hotras for the inquisitive dora he shouted “Here!” and stabbed the map with the point of a pen in the middle  of the path. 

Without lingering outside his door as he had done with Baballa, Mrtyu,  Lord of Death, rushed swiftly into Bulusu Cayanulu’s house and felled him  without warning. The heart attack came after he cycled home from the vil lage to unload groceries in anticipation of a visit from a daughter and her  husband. The older folk in the agrahara, prone to ruminate on the suffering  that precedes death, admired this as a proper, painless way to go. His funeral  just outside the agrahara included not only brahma-medha and punar-dahana,  but also the losta-citi ritual of piling mud bricks in commemmoration of his  agni-cayana twenty-eight years before. 

Subbalaksmi, a shy, pretty woman with an affectionate smile, was always in  the shadow of her much older husband’s wishes, fulfilling all chores and then  tending the agni-hotra during the thirty-two years she spent as a somi-devamma.  “From the time I was fourteen I was very reticent. I had so much bhaya (fear)  in the early days of our marriage.” Then, as one of several white-clad widows  in the agrahara, and later in her neighborhood of Rajahmundry, having long  since completed her constant program of nomu, ritual vows that are largely  for the protection of husband and sons, she spent her time reading about the  dasavatara, the ten incarnations of Visnu, and reading aloud to herself the  sahasra-nama, litanies of the thousand names of Visnu, the goddess Lalita,  and other deities. This she enjoys immensely. Subbalaksmi claims not to have  had knowledge of aksara (letters) until a few years after her husband’s passing.  He had always opposed, she says flatly, her desire to learn to read and write.  Unlike the other somi-devamma with daughters living only a few villages away,  Subbalaksmi’s daughters are spread out far beyond Konasima, perhaps due to 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 91 

liaisons made long since through the more cosmopolitan center of Vijayawada  and the auspices of Renducintala Yajulu. Daughters have gone to Bangalore,  Tirupati, and Hyderabad, although remaining in Rajahmundry are one daugh ter as well as her only son. With far better bus service on vastly improved  roads, Rajahmundry can now be reached on a good day in less than two hours  instead of the five or more of former days. 

Bulusu Cayanulu’s legacy of Veda ended in the male vamsa (lineage) but  may possibly feed into another male line through a daughter, as in the case of  Lanka, Bulusu Kamesvara, and other ahitagni. His third daughter, married to  Renducintala’s fourth son, has a son with a college degree who also learned  Veda at home. Bulusu Cayanulu’s first son, Ramana Murti, who was raised by  his grandmother after the death of his mother in 1945, has a son doing smarta,  and thus another dimension of Bulusu Cayanulu’s career may also continue. 

Subbalaksmi has a photo album on her lap spread open to reveal the hand some young man in white, Bulusu before he became Cayanulu, Bulusu before  she was born. When she reflects about her life, Subbalaksmi has said on more  than one occasion: “Way back when he was born in Vyaghresvaram village,  ‘Cayanulu’ was written by the god Brahma on his forehead. And marriage to  him was what was written on mine.” 

Cayanulu was the second of Sriramapuram’s trio of ahitagni to go, leaving  only Yajulu. By 1997 the lane had not changed much in seventeen years. Off to  the south through the trees some houses had become visible in an expanding  non-Brahman hamlet. The school at the lane’s end boasted a new play area.  On a steamy March day half a dozen nearly naked workers split and husked  coconuts for coir while others loaded mammoth lorries destined for Gujarat,  Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh. On that morning no sounds of Veda competed  with the new enterprise. 
