+++
title = "4 Samavedam (1932–2008) and Sons"

+++

A fourth habitually visible figure in the agrahara, well known and respected  throughout coastal Andhra, was Samavedam Suryanarayana Avadhani, Harita  gotra, resident of Sriramapuram for well over half a century. His grandfa ther was an ahitagni in Mukkamala but neither his Telugu pandit father nor  Samavedam himself chose the life of agni-hotra and srauta, preferring instead  to concentrate on steering sons into Vedic education. “I teach and recite  Veda,” said Samavedam, “and this is all my life.” In fact, both father and son  accomplished the same feat, each carefully preparing two out of four sons for  careers as Veda pandits and seeking as far as possible to marry daughters to  Veda pandits.

[[92]]

Samavedam had the clear-eyed gaze of a fox on the hunt and the restless,  spare build of that focused prowler. There seemed to be no apparent limit to  his entrepreneurial energy. He was born on the next to last day of 1932, fourth  of the four brothers of his generation. After upanayana at age ten he spent ten  years learning Veda, initially with his oldest brother at home in Mukkamala,  then with Bulusu Vyaghresvara in Billakurru. This was long before this  Bulusu (Cayanulu above) became his guru and subsequently a neighbor in  the actual hamlet of Vyaghresvaram close to Sriramapuram. Yet another men tor was Rani Hayagriva in Indupalli. Samavedam did varalu and madhu-kara 

in each village of his three successive gurus and appeared successfully for his  exam in krama in Vijayawada in 1955.6 By that time he had married Kamala,  younger sister of Baballa’s daughter-in-law, of the Prabhala family in Velcheru,  and they had a boy and a girl of their eventual six children (see Figure 3.9,  Samavedam and Kamala, Sriramapuram 1996). 

The new krama-pathi was granted in that same year of 1955 a plot in  Sriramapuram along with Rs. 1,000 to construct a house, plus an acre of land  with an assured yield of fifteen bags of paddy. It was barely more than a ten minute walk from the busy village of Mukkamala, but Samavedam’s mother  objected to the move on the grounds that they would be lonely “way out there.”  Samavedam, however, youngest of the sons, with little hope of inheriting the 

  

Figure 3.9. Samavedam and Kamala, Sriramapuram 1996. 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 93 

house of a burgeoning extended family, wanted his own home, even if there  were only five other families in the outlying agrahara. By the first decade of  the new millennium, buses, huge trucks, cars, and motor scooters all zoomed  constantly with excessive blasts of air-horns to force bicycles, pedestrians, and  animals off the road; electric and telephone wires bounced in the wind above  asphalt paving; and only those of Samavedam’s generation recalled that peace 

ful but remote 1950s era. “If we tried to walk the dirt path back to Mukkamala  it was difficult. In the dark it was dreadful, terrifying. Will someone jump out  and seize me? It was a long way between settlements.” 

Samavedam’s acre of paddy was tilled by a tenant farmer for some years  until problems arose with Scheduled Caste encroachments. “They built huts  to live in, stole the coconuts, started chicken farms, so I sold that acre at a low  price and bought a half-acre elsewhere.” But he came out even when the new  land yielded two rice harvests per year instead of one. Eventually he sold that  half-acre as well, upon discovery that he could gain a steady income as a Veda  pandit. Samavedam was never shy about soliciting money. “I went to a lot of  people asking for money to build up a career.” Always on his mind was the  tension between going out to seek funds by reciting, or staying home to teach  sons on a daily basis. “If I don’t earn money I cannot maintain this samsara. If  I do go out and earn money, teaching suffers. The two are incompatible.” His  compromise was to start Veda with all four sons, then select the most men tally agile pair for continued adhyaya while steering the other two into laukika careers, hopefully something in Sastra as pandits like their grandfather. By the  time the fourth son reached the minimum age for upanayana, the oldest was  twenty-four and the middle sons—those who were to complete the eighty-two  panna—were twenty-two and twelve. 

When Samavedam went out of the agrahara it was mostly to do asir-vacana, a blessing via mantras recited at a wedding, housewarming ritual, or other  auspicious event. Or it could be to recite in a sabha assembly, or at a large  festival such as Mahasivaratri to do svasti-vacana at the Virabhadra temple in  Pattisima, or a Varuna puja in Tirupati, or to observe a srauta ritual to which  he had been invited. Of the last he said without a hint of apology, “I go only  to receive money and then leave.” He never observed a complete srauta ritual.  He became a Vedic voice for hire and to his last day would go anywhere, any time, as long as a fee was assured. Without recourse to notebooks he was an  astonishing font of information, expatiating on all recent and forthcoming  Vedic events, with places, dates, names of all the sponsors and, most impor tant, all amounts of remuneration. The territory routinely canvassed included  the whole of the two Godavari districts, but long-range forays into Guntur,  Krishna, and Vishakapatnam districts were not infrequent, and he often nar rated his visits to “a very rich Telugu Brahman in Madras” among others.

[[94]]

Occasional windfalls arrived closer together in his later years and each was  remembered with pleasure. For example, in October 1994 a Vaisnava “yaga”  (pseudo-Vedic sacrifice) required 150 Veda pandits to do parayana from 7 am to noon for twelve successive days while a thousand homas were addressed to  Laksmi-Narayana. Samavedam and both sons were there. The trio was then again  involved in a group of sixty pandits reciting Veda seven days in August 1995 for  a sixtieth-birthday celebration in Kanci. Each received Rs. 1,116 plus a sovereign  of gold, fourteen tola of silver plate (approximately Rs.1,000), new clothes, and  silk saris for the three wives. Only three months later they went to Puttaparthi  to honor Sathya Sai Baba’s seventieth birthday as three of the invited seventy  pandits. Again Samavedam produced a rapid recital of rewards: “Each Rs. 5,000,  an ‘automatic’ watch, new clothes, and for each wife, silk saris, two solid gold  bangles, a pressure cooker, free food and lodging for a week, Rs.1,000 for travel.” 

All of this shows that Samavedam was a professional reciter and expected,  even demanded, to be paid well for professional service. He was direct,  straightforward, totally honest about his career of reciting for remuneration.  He was also quite content with his life, something that cannot be said of every  Veda pandit. “There is work and there is enjoyment from work,” he allowed.  They were a familiar traveling trio, a spry, bouncy, effervescent Samavedam,  always preserving yon Cassius’ lean and hungry look, and the softer, more  phlegmatic sons, products of a different diet, more passive ethos, and always  the comfort of an established home in a stable hamlet. 

In his mind Samavedam had a clear distinction between satkara, hono raria for blessings or other felicitations at marriages and such, and dana, ritualized gifts or donations. The former are earned and are always accept able. The latter require examination. The 1955 donation of land and con struction costs was proper. His degree qualifications and his homelessness  

rendered him deserving and the gift was “clean” from the point of view of  Dharmasastra. On the other hand, recalling that 1995 sixtieth-birthday cel ebration in Kanci, he found the presentation of a cow (go-dana) along with  free fodder for six months (“a Rs.3,000 value in itself,” he remarked) quite  unacceptable. A cow falls in the category of ugra-dana, a dangerous gift that  could have life-threatening consequences for the recipient. “Only Brahmans  of low status will accept a cow, even though it is quite valuable. In Krishna  and Guntur districts Brahmans take all kinds of dana. For them it is all right.  But we Konasima Brahmans are strict. We are known as those who purify  fire with water. If dana are accepted, a lot of santi has to be performed, japa,  Gayatri mantra, etc. Hopefully, the dana will not then eat away the recipient.  But one cannot be sure.” (See Figure 3.10, Samavedam with the three ahitagni 

of Sriramapuram, 1991.)

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 95   Figure 3.10. Samavedam, left, with the three ahitagni of Sriramapuram, Bulusu  Cayanulu, Duvvuri Yajulu, Baballa, 1991.

When not out on the sat-kara circuit Samavedam was usually found at  home teaching on the arugu of his house. His second son, Venkatarama, was a  quick learner and was pulled out of school at third class in exclusive devotion to  Veda. After nine years on the eighty-two panna he went on for three more years  to excel in ghana, stood first in his exam, and added Ghanapathi to his name.  Venkatarama was married to Kumari and after she joined the household in  Sriramapuram, two sons and two daughters were added to the extended family.  Both boys entered a veda-pathasala in Hyderabad, the older one after a year of  learning under grandfather Samavedam. One of the two girls was married at  fourteen to a ghana-pathi in Iragavaram, West Godavari District, in yet another  liaison between that village and the Sriramapuram agrahara. Samavedam’s  third son, Bhaskara, had his upanayana several years later than Venkatarama,  remained in school until eighth class, but nevertheless completed krama and  then ghana, and was married at twenty-two to Sundari, age thirteen, in 1986.  This second couple added a boy and a girl to the growing list of Samavedam’s  grandchildren and brought the number living in the house to twelve. 

Of Samavedam and Kamala’s two daughters, the older, Laksmi, was mar ried to a Veda pandit, her mother’s brother, Prabhala Krishnamurti. This cou ple produced a son for their extended family in Velcheru as well as a daughter.  Venkatarama, who bears the same family name as Laksmi’s brother, was taught96 vedic voices 

Veda from the age of eleven by grandfather Samavedam for ten years until  December 1995, his successful examination occurring the following March. The  second daughter of Samavedam and Kamala, Visalaksi, was married in 1982 to  a laukika husband, a salesman, at age sixteen after a fruitless search for a sec 

ond Veda pandit son-in-law. Unlike the ahitagni lineages with their fixation on  pre-pubescent marriages, there was no concern over a post-menarche ceremony.  The dowry and expenses for Visalaksi were Rs. 23,000 and Samavedam well  remembers being in debt for five years. “When I buy in the vegetable market it’s  the same price for me as for anyone, no discount for being a pandit. It’s true also  in the son-in-law market. If I say I’m a Veda pandit the dowry stays the same.”  Decrying the change in cultural standards he said: “Parents today do not want  their sons in an agrahara. They want them to go to an office and sit under a fan.” 

The remaining two of Samavedam and Kamala’s six children, born  first and last, with sixteen years between them, Suryanarayana Murti and  Mallesvarudu, respectively, learned some Veda but gravitated toward laukika careers. The firstborn married a granddaughter of Duvvuri Yajulu. By the  year 2000, Samavedam and Kamala had thirteen grandchildren. One grand daughter was married away to the older of the two sons of Chirravuri Ramam,  Baballa’s favorite student, in Rajahmundry. 

In sum, this is a remarkable family record. Before he died suddenly in 2008  Samavedam had taught two sons and one grandson the complete Taittiriya  corpus, taught the other two sons and another grandson in part, and married  a daughter and a granddaughter to Veda pandits. Adhyaya occurred entirely  within the family, so there were no daksina. It would appear that Samavedam  and Kamala were exactly the kind of pair for whom the agrahara was estab 

lished in the mid-twentieth century. 

When asked if he ever accepted a student from outside the family,  Samavedam replied in the negative. “That invites problems,” he volunteered.  “You have to set him up in your house, find families in the village to feed  him. In some of those houses there will be days of impurity. Other families  may think I am imposing on them. So I don’t accept outsiders.” Ritual purity  was a lasting concern as Samavedam only taught when in madi. If a visit to  Sriramapuram interrupted adhyaya, he came and sat near but then shrank  from any possible touch by children running through, and he asked that any  photo prints from the previous visit be dropped on a nearby bench so that he  could look at them later when out of madi. 

At times Samavedam could not wait for another visitation and would  come to Rajahmundry, sons in tow in all their glowing red silk-shawl finery,  clean-shaven, top-knotted, and gold-earringed, to provide a lusty asir-vacana blessing in three-part ghana and receive an overly generous Rs. 500 each plus 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 97 

200 travel money. For them it was a merry holiday on buses out of the agra hara to the big “city,” and for the astonished staff of a sleepy, drab hotel their  arrivals and departures in bicycle rickshaws were always awe-inspiring con versation pieces. It was never possible to explain to the staff how these people  

live, and what it is they do, to quote Lewis Carroll’s “Red Knight’s Song.” Given the perpetual urge to seek monetary compensation for recitation, it is  remarkable to note the refusal of invitations to go to the several Hindu temples  in America seeking Veda pandits. At one point the two sons were among eigh teen Konasima pandits who received requests from Pittsburgh. “None of us has  any asakti (interest).” said Bhaskara. “The vrata (vow) of a sacred life would be  broken with no fruit to show for it. My elders never ate in the same line with a  man who had gone to America and returned. Such a man was shunned, excom municated. One man went to America. His father died and the son was not  there for him. Of what use is that son? Religious obligations are expected. Those  who go to America only want money.” These scruples in the face of potentially  high income are noteworthy since there was no mention of any paternal caveat  similar to the line that Duvvuri Yajulu drew for his descendants. Several aspects of Samavedam’s life distinguished him from some of the  Veda pandits surveyed thus far. Beyond his successful dedication to teaching  Veda to carefully selected sons and grandsons there was his total disinterest in  srauta, even as an observer; his energetic, uninhibited acceptance of the new cash  economy; and his openness to revealing the ritual schedules of others. In the  matter of perpetuating Veda by oral instruction within the family, Samavedam  would be Exhibit A for the TTD promotion of stipends and honoraria. His life is  instructive in any attempt to understand the dynamics of the wider Vedic com munity. After Samavedam’s death, third son Bhaskara Avadhani and Sundari  took over the house in the Sriramapuram agrahara. Second son Venkatarama  Ghanapathi and Kumari are currently living in Hyderabad. 