+++
title = "Hymns to the Ruddy Sun or Rohita."

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

Book XIII.

⌊**Hymns to the Ruddy Sun or Rohita.**⌋

⌊We come now to the third grand division of the text, books xiii.-xviii.
In the first division (books i.-vii.) we had the short hymns of
miscellaneous subjects, and in the second (books viii.-xii.) we had the
long hymns of miscellaneous subjects. In the third, the principle
governing the arrangement and division of the material is in the main
clearly that of unity of subject (compare the General Introduction and
the Table of Contents): thus book xiii. consists of hymns to the Ruddy
Sun or Rohita; xiv. consists of wedding verses; xv. is the book about
the Vrātya; and xviii. consists of hymns for the dead. Accordingly, it
is perhaps worthy of note that the Old Anukramaṇī does not describe the
length of any hymn in book xiii. by reference to a certain length
assumed as a norm. The whole book has been translated by Victor Henry,
*Les hymnes Rohitas. Livre XIII de l'Atharva-véda traduit et commenté*,
Paris, 1891. Henry's work was made the subject of a detailed review by
Bloomfield in the *American Journal of Philology* (xii. 429-443) for
1891. Then, at Paris in 1892, appeared *Le mythe de Rohita, traduction
raisonnée du 13e livre de l'Atharva-véda*, by Paul Regnaud. As appears
below, Ludwig's translation covers the first three of the four hymns of
the book; Deussen's, the first and third; and Bloomfield's, the first.
For books xii.-xvi. inclusive, the *bhāṣya* is wanting.⌋

⌊**Paryāya-hymns:** for details respecting them, see pages 471-2. The
fourth or last hymn of this book is a *paryāya-sūkta* with 6 *paryāyas*.
For the discrepancy of numeration as between the two editions, see page
611.⌋

  

⌊The *anuvāka*-division of the book is into four *anuvāka* of one hymn
each, and is thus (like the *anuvāka*-division of book xii.) coincident
with the hymn-division. A conspectus for book xiii. follows:

|                |        |            |            |     |
|----------------|--------|------------|------------|-----|
| Anuvākas       | 1      | 2          | 3          | 4   |
| Hymns          | 1      | 2          | 3          | 4   |
| Verses         | 60     | 46         | 26         | 56¶ |
| Decad-division | 6 tens | 4 tens + 6 | 2 tens + 6 | 6 P |



Here ¶ means "paragraph of a *paryāya*" (such as is numbered as a
"verse" in the Berlin edition) and P means "*paryāya*." Of the "decads,"
*anuvākas* 1, 2, and 3 contain respectively 6, 5, and 3 (in all, 14
"decads"); while *anuvāka* 4 has 6 *paryāyas*. The sum is 14
"decad"-*sūktas* and 6 *paryāya-sūktas* or 20 *sūktas* (cf. p. 737).⌋
</details>
