+++
title = "16 Buddhism"

+++





### Why Buddhism?

Kāśyapa or Mahākāśyapa, whose first name was Pippali, was born in Magadha around the fifth century BCE. His name comes from *kaśyapa* which means ‘tortoise’ and is a non-Indo-European word. His father, Kapila, was a rich brahman, perhaps a descendant of a Vedic family of Indic origins. *Kapila* is a Vedic colour term referring to a brownish hue, perhaps derived from *kapi* or ‘monkey’. His mother’s name was Sumanādevī. He married Bhadrā Kāpilānī, a girl from Śākala but the marriage was not consummated. Both decided to retire from the world and went their own ways as was not uncommon during those Upaniṣadic times at the end of the Veda. They left their names which provide us with some information, but a great deal more is known about Kāśyapa.

Just as Kāśyapa or Kaśyapa is an old Vedic name, *pippala* refers to the fig tree after which the Paippalāda school of the Atharvaveda was named. Was Kāśyapa a follower of that school, which originated further west but certainly existed in Magadha by that time? It would not contradict the fact that his fiancée came from Sialkot in the Punjab—another couple of hundred miles even further to the west. Prominent people had long been settled by that time but were travelling widely and mostly on foot.

Kāśyapa’s path crossed that of the Buddha, recently enlightened and already surrounded by throngs of followers. The Buddha led him aside, gave him three pieces of advice and admitted him to the Sangha or order. They exchanged robes. Eight days later, the Buddha declared that Kāśyapa was the first who followed ‘the ascetic rules’—thirteen as mentioned in the Pali texts of the Theravāda or ‘Doctrine of the Elders’, and twelve in the traditions of the Mahāyāna, the ‘Great Vehicle’, sometimes preserved in Sanskrit, but often lost in India and better preserved in Chinese and other languages. Fragments of such texts are sometimes preserved in pots, found until very recently in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

The Theravāda is sometimes called Hīnayāna, the ‘Abandoned Vehicle’, a pejorative attributed to followers of the Mahāyāna. The Theravāda went from India to Sri Lanka and spread over South-east Asia. The Mahāyāna went to Central Asia, China, Korea, Japan, Tibet and Mongolia. The story of Kāśyapa’s conversion is preserved in both traditions which differ in many respects but are equally valid for our knowledge of Buddhism.

Traditions agree that Mahākāśyapa, now ‘the Great Turtle’, outlived the Buddha and was an important figure in early Buddhism. How do we distinguish traditions from facts? The early development of Buddhism was undoubtedly oral, but it did not use techniques for its preservation like the Vedic. We must pick carefully among the many traditions, even if they agree, until we reach the dated inscriptions of Emperor Aśoka who lived some centuries later—from 268 to 233 BCE. The ‘picking’ can only be done by experts. They would reject the tradition that Kāśyapa composed the *Abhidharma Pi*ṭ*aka*, the important third of the three baskets *pi*ṭ*aka*. They should be distinguished from the three jewels \(*ratna*\): Buddha, Dhama and Sangha treasures, neither Buddha nor Sangha occur in the Vedas. But the word *dharma* is common from the Rigveda onward. Referring to rituals performed for the gods who were performing rituals themselves, the late hymn to Puruṣa \(*Three: Civilization and Society*\) exclaims: ‘Those were the First Dharmas\!’ \(*tāni dharmā*ṇ*i prathamāny āsan*\). Of course, the word *dharma* did not mean the same. Words change their meanings.

It is generally accepted that Mahākāśyapa presided over the first Buddhist Council which sought to settle what the Buddha had taught and about which we have much information. He was then said to be the seniormost of the monks alive and questioned others about what they remembered of Buddha’s words. It is through brahmans like him that the Vedas could have influenced Buddhism. Or did Buddhism influence the Vedas? That depends, in the first place, on history and chronology. But are we not rushing ahead before addressing a weightier question: are we not comparing incompatible entities? Is not Buddhism a ‘religion’ founded by a historical person while I have repeatedly stated and demonstrated that the Vedas are not a religion, in that or any of the many accepted meanings of the term? These seem to be questions we have to answer before we can even begin. As a matter of fact, we cannot; but will pursue them in the following pages.

Let us return once more to Kāśyapa. When he felt that his end was near, the earth engulfed and concealed him until the end of times when Maitreya, the future Buddha, appeared and received from his hands the Buddha’s robe.

It is not easy to determine whether the Vedas influenced Buddhism, but there is plenty of evidence in the texts of the Pali canon that their authors—Buddhist monks—were well informed even about details of Vedic mantras and ritual. Words of mantras such as the Gāyatrī, are quoted in Pali transliteration. It is known that the mantra consists of three lines of eight syllables as we have seen in Chapter 11. Details of Śrauta and other rituals are referred to, including the *aśvamedha* horse sacrifice and the human sacrifice \(see chapter 12\). It is typical monkish knowledge, not intended for Buddhist laymen who are not conversant with these details. How did Buddhist monks acquire such knowledge? It is obvious that it comes from brahman converts such as Kāśyapa.

I shall end this brief discussion with an apparent case of Buddhist influence on an early Upaniṣad. The relevant passage occurs in the early Chāndogya Upaniṣad and I have quoted it already at the outset of Part III but without including its conclusion. I shall repeat it here, beginning with sage Uddālaka Āruṇi instructing his son Śvetaketu and now adding the conclusion:
>
> ‘Bring a banyan fruit.’

> ‘Here it is, sir.’

> ‘Cut it up.’

> ‘I’ve cut it up, sir.’

> ‘What do you see there?’

> ‘These quite tiny seeds, sir.’

> ‘Now, take one of them and cut it up.’

> ‘I’ve cut one up, sir.’

> ‘What do you see there?’

> ‘Nothing, sir.’

The question that arises here is: does ‘nothing’ refer to the doctrine of emptiness \(*śūnyatā*\), a celebrated Buddhist teaching that seems to state the exact opposite of what we read about the fullness of brahman in some Upaniṣads and throughout the Vedānta or ‘end of the Veda’?

The context provides the answer. Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.8–16 consists of nine short sections in which Uddālaka Āruṇi instructs his son Śvetaketu. Each section gives a different answer and ends with the same phrase: ‘That which is this finest minuteness, that the whole world has as its self. That is the truth. That is the self. In that way you are \(*tat tvam asi*\)’.

It is difficult to tell whether the ‘nothing’ of 6.12, the fifth of these nine sections, displays a whiff of Buddhist influence or emerged from Uddālaka’s brain or somewhere else, but it is obvious that he did not treat that nothing as anything special.



### History, Geography and an Inkling of Nirvāṇa

Questions concerning the early relations between Buddhism and the Vedas are highly controversial and can only be answered by taking a closer look at history and geography.

We also have to widen the perspective. Jainism is demonstrably older than Buddhism and did certainly exist at the time of the Upaniṣads. Jainism is generally ascribed to Mahāvīra, an older contemporary of the Buddha, but Jaina sources mention many precursors of which one, Pārśva, is historical, pushing the date back to the ninth century BCE—the time of the Yajurveda. For the Buddha’s death or *nirvā*ṇ*a* \(a term that means ‘enlightenment’ or ‘extinction’, literally ‘blowing out’, and does not occur in the early Upaniṣads\), we have two chronologies, the long and the short. The long one assigns it to around 486 BCE. The short one assigns it to around 368 BCE. There is no controversy about his place of birth, which is Kapilāvastu, a place below the lower foothills of the Himalayas, located close to the modern border between India and Nepal. From there the Buddha made his way southwards and reached the kingdom of Magadha with which we have been familiar since the map of Figure 2 where it is indicated by Mg. It is south-east of the Ganges near Pāṭaliputra, modern Patna. The later portions of the Rigvedic Aitareya Brāhmaṇa were familiar with this area and tell us that the Vedic sage Viśvāmitra adopted Magadha tribes that were living there. During this period, major clearance of jungle areas took place, facilitated by the increased use of iron tools. It led to an expanse of rice cultivation with a surplus in production which allowed lavish spending on large rituals such as those performed by King Janaka, a figure known to the composers of the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upaniṣad and in Buddhist sources which does not prove much since both refer to the past often.

It is clear that the middle and later Upaniṣads were familiar with ideas and doctrines that are similar to those of Jainism and Buddhism. At the time of writing \(late 2006\), a controversy was raging on the Indology web-site about the relationships between early Buddhism and the earliest Upaniṣads, the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka and the Chāndogya, to which I shall refer as BĀU and CU, respectively. It was initiated by Jan Houben of Leiden who asked whether the BĀU was written \(?\) in Buddha’s time. A flood of reactions followed. Those who were primarily familiar with one side argued, predictably, for that side. No one paid attention to geography though all of them knew, presumably, that the Buddha Śākyamuni, ‘Sage of the Śākyas’, was born at Kapilāvastu, near the present border between Nepal and India. I mention two of these reactions by way of illustration.

Matthew Kapstein, a Sanskritist who has done much work on Tibetan Buddhist texts, claimed that the ‘final redaction’ of the CU was composed ‘post-Buddha’. He hardly explained ‘final redaction’, but let us assume that he refers to the composition left behind by the final editors of the CU and BĀU who drew from ‘a common stock of Upaniṣadic lore’, as Olivelle put it. There are, however, other facts that must be taken into account, e.g., that BĀU is the final portion of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa which was composed, in the recension that is relevant in our context, in Kośala, close to the birthplace of the Buddha, and belongs to ca. 800–700 BCE.

Kapstein does not seem to have taken into account that the CU was composed much further west, probably in Pañcāla, and deals very largely with typically Sāmavedic topics such as the syllable OM which refers to the *udgītha*. Nor does he seem to know that Masato Fujii has shown that the Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa, a similar Sāmaveda Upaniṣad, is earlier than the CU.

My second illustration comes from Toshifumi Goto who is familiar with both sides. He has drawn attention to unexpected similarities between Yājñavalkya’s characterization of the *ātman* in the BĀU and four kinds of suffering in Buddhism. The BĀU uses four terms to qualify the self: *ajara* ‘unaging’, *amara* ‘undying’, *am*ṛ*ta* ‘immortal’ and *abhaya* ‘fearless’. They occur together and generally in this order. What happens when we remove the negative prefixes ‘*a*—’, that is, the negations from these terms, and change the order? We begin by replacing *ajara* by *jara* ‘aging’. Goto then replaces *abhaya* by *vyādhi* ‘sickness’ because it is a common and concrete example of something we fear in our daily life. Next comes *amara* which does not occur in Vedic. Goto replaces it by *mara*ṇ*am* ‘death.’ Finally, we replace *am*ṛ*ta* by *jāti* ‘birth’, which refers primarily to the second birth, that of initiation. We are left with a description of old age, sickness, death and the enlightened monk and recall the tradition of the young prince Siddhārtha witnessing those four when he had left his home and before he became a Buddha. He then preached the Four Noble Truths which are again reminiscent of the foursome at least in part and which I list here as translated by Lamotte: \(1\) everything is suffering; \(2\) the origin of suffering is desire; \(3\) there exists a Nirvāṇa, an end to suffering; \(4\) a path, defined by the Buddha, leads to Nirvāṇa.

Goto shows that BĀU and early Buddhism are both operating with similar concepts.

Whether the correspondence is perfect or not, it is an ingenious exercise of an excellent philologist which draws attention to deep similarities that had never been brought to the surface. Goto wisely abstained from any conclusion about priorities.

How can we establish priorities when the paths are so slippery? Discussions about the particular use of an isolated term, the rice-and-ghee of the philologist’s menu, are practically useless when we do not even know which language the Buddha spoke. Terms that seem special to us may have come into common usage without us knowing anything about it because the texts are silent. Chronological discussions about priorities cannot be solved by concentrating on these compositions in isolation from wider historical developments and geographical backgrounds. It is important that the BĀU is the final portion of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa and that after the BĀU there must have been enough time for composing other pre-Buddhist Upaniṣads.

That we have to pay attention to a wide perspective is the important conclusion that follows from the work of Michael Witzel. He took account of *all* Vedic compositions and placed them in a sequence that reflects such a perspective. I have followed Witzel often, as mentioned in the Preface. His comments on details are, of course, open to the scrutiny of other specialists, but the extended chronology that he made accessible by placing *all* Vedic compositions in a credible sequence, enabled him to provide us with a perspective that is not only wider but also deeper than the common perspective \(or lack of perspective\). It established, for example, that both the Sāmaveda and the Black Yajurveda originated in Kuru times, that is, ca. 1,000 BCE, and that the Śatapatha belongs to ca. 800–700 BCE, as I mentioned a moment ago. That is well before Buddhism though we cannot say exactly how long.

Apart from chronology, *general* matters of content also play a role. If we compare CU and BĀU we cannot fail to notice that the former is more positive than the latter in the following sense. It is closer to Rig- and Sāmaveda than the BĀU which combines Yajurvedic ritualism with the Upaniṣadic emphasis on renunciation. BĀU characterizes the *ātman* as *neti neti*, ‘neither this nor that’. Buddhism is similarly negative when compared to the earlier Vedas, especially the Rigveda.

The Rigveda consists of poetry and it likes puzzles. That spirit survives in the joy that composers of early Upaniṣads experienced in long sequences of questions and answers and public debates. The Buddha did not approve of such debates and was not interested in the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake. This is epitomized in the story of the man who was struck by a poisonous arrow and asked many questions about who had shot it, what wood the arrow was made of and what its poison contained. The Buddha said: that man would die before he got his answers. In the Upaniṣads, Yājñavalkya presented a variation when he told Gārgī: ‘Don’t ask too many questions\!’, as we have seen in Chapter 10.

We should return to the Four Noble Truths. All such enumerations, famous as they are, do not sound like insights of the Buddha. They are school examples, formulated for mass consumption, possibly by the master himself later in life or by his pupils. Buddha’s insight was Nirvāṇa, the culmination of a path that was subdivided by teachers into steps: morality \(ethics\), meditation or *samādhi* \(variously translated\), and wisdom \(*prajñā*\). Note that *prajñā* contains the same verbal root *jñā*—as does *jñāna* or ‘knowledge’, a synonym of Vedic *veda* and *vidyā.*

The term *prājña* ‘wise’—with different position of the long ā—occurs in the BĀU: ‘Like a man in the embrace of his beloved knows of nothing outside, nothing inside, that person in the embrace of the wise *ātman* \(*prājñena ātmanā*\) knows of nothing outside, nothing inside.’ This speaks for itself and need not refer to anything else, but if we want to, it could be interpretated as a reaction against the tedium of Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas of which it announces the end. It illustrates at the same time an embrace that we do not find in early Buddhist texts,

The Buddhist *prajñā* is not a gnosis of vague and imprecise content. It is a clear vision, as Lamotte emphasizes: ‘embracing the Noble Truths and penetrating in depth the general characteristics of things—impermanence, suffering and the impersonality of phenomena—as well as the peace of Nirvāṇa’.

Clear to Lamotte, no doubt, but Indic philosophies introduced a little more clarity as we have seen at the end of Chapter 10, which referred to the ritual philosophy of the Mīmāṃsā, closely related to the Śrauta Sūtras, and its distinction between activities that have a beginning and an end and those that do not \(p. 183\). It is relevant here.

The Mīmāṃsā philosophy consists of two parts: the first or Pūrva Mīmāṃsā deals with Vedic injunctions which pertain to what is to be accomplished \(*sādhya*\). That applies to ritual and meditation. The Pūrva Mīmāṃsā is also a philosophy of language \(more specifically: of the sentence\) and therefore sensitive to linguistic distinctions. The second Mīmāṃsā is the higher or superior Uttara Mīmāṃsā of the Upaniṣads and the Vedānta which coined the pejorative Pūrva Mīmāṃsā just as did the Mahāyāna with respect to what it called Hīnayāna, the Abandoned Vehicle. The aim of the Vedānta is knowledge which is instantaneous and beyond time. It corresponds to the vision of *prajñā* mentioned by Lamotte. It is ‘accomplished’ \(*siddha*\), not ‘to be accomplished’ \(*sādhya*\) like ritual or meditation. This is an accurate observation with a tinge of ordinary language argumentation supporting it. Knowledge is not a process; *acquiring* knowledge is a process. I do not say: ‘I have the acquisition of knowledge’ but: ‘I have knowledge.’ This holds not only of English. The same applies to the Buddhist concept of wisdom.

Language has serious limitations as we have seen in Chapter 15. No wonder that meditation and wisdom go beyond language. Since there is no special language, apart from mantras, should we be silent in spite of the loquacity of some masters? Recall that the Japanese Zen comes from the Chinese Ch’an which comes from the Sanskrit *dhyāna.* It requires silence and sitting and has a beginning and an end. Zen Masters may render further assistance.

History and geography are concerned with one more topic: the spread of Buddhism over large parts of Asia. Proselytization is absent from the Vedas and Buddhism resembles, in that respect, religions like Christianity and Islam. Even so, the Vedas and Buddhism both moved, albeit in opposite directions. The relevant information was gathered in Part I and is depicted by the Frontispiece at which the reader is invited to take another look. It shows to what extent the movements of Vedic Indo-Aryans and those of Buddhist monks mirror each other. I shall not repeat what I wrote there but we may derive a further conclusion: the tracks numbered 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 depict not only continuous movements and exchanges between people, ideas, rites and goods which show the artificiality of labels such as ‘Vedic’ or ‘Buddhist’, they also explain that, in due course, Buddhism returned to where some features of the Veda came from.



### About the Vedas and Buddhism

Are we getting immersed in details, history and geography, and losing the forest for the trees? I have three general quotes to keep the reader on our track of discovery, two from modern scholars, one from Indian philosophy and a small Indic diversion to widen the perspective before we take a plunge into deeper waters.

The Rigveda went further than deriving pleasure from poetry and poetics. It presents us with a positive outlook on life that is not absent from the Sāmaveda, becomes more turbid in the Yajurveda and returns in the Upaniṣads. I am not preaching a return to the Vedic life or adoption of the Buddhist path. I am looking for light they may throw on each other and what we can learn from this. Here a quote about the spirit of the Rigveda from Wendy Doniger in her chapter on ‘Realia’ is useful. It does more than that label suggests and was written, I am sure, without the author giving Buddhism a thought:
>
> The *Rig Veda* is a sacred book, but it is a very worldly sacred book. Nowhere can we find the tiniest suspicion of a wish to renounce the material world in favour of some spiritual quest; religion is the handmaiden of worldly life. The gods are invoked to give the worshipper the things he wants—health, wealth, long life and progeny. That is not to say that there is anything superficial about Vedic religious concerns, but merely that these meditations stem from a life-affirming, joyous celebration of human existence.

Buddha did not display so positive a spirit. Neither did he seek support from the Vedas by invoking them for legitimation, whether innovatively or out of context as did the Purāṇas and other later perspectives on India’s past. Does it imply that we are now ready, after fifteen chapters on the Vedas, to plunge into Buddhism without further ado? We must first ask what kind of thing Buddhism is. Are we comparing incompatibles? In partial response to that question, I shall quote Etienne Lamotte, a Catholic priest, and generally regarded as the greatest Buddhist scholar of the twentieth century. He never made comparisons but had some affinity with the topic:
>
> Adhesion to the Buddhist faith does not require that the adept rejects his ancestral beliefs or denounces the religious practices that are current in his *milieu*. Through one of those compromises of which India has given so many examples, everyone is free to worship apart from the Three Treasures \(Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, p. 307\), the deities of his region, caste or choice and perform the appropriate rites. Throughout history one meets with famous Buddhists who continue their worship of spirits, Nāga and Suparṇa, Yakṣa, Vajrapāṇi, Women and Fairies. Householders, benefactors of the Sangha, remain loyal to the gods of their class: Kuvera, spirit of riches; Hāritī, the fairy with the children; the tutelary Couple, etc. The higher castes continue their demand for the great Vedic and Brahmanic deities: Indra, Brahmā, Māra, etc. The advent of Buddhism has never produced a ‘twilight of the gods’. Śākyamuni does not oppose the pagan gods of Hinduism. He recognizes that ‘the deities, honoured and worshipped by man, will in turn honour and worship him.’ He does not condemn pagan rites: he disapproves of sacrifice in which living beings are killed; he recommends peaceful offerings devoid of cruelty; certain practices based upon pure superstition, ritual baths, etc., are practically without value. What is important is to put everything in its place: gifts to pious monks are better than the cults of the gods; taking refuge in the Three Treasures is better than giving gifts; the highest achievement of sacrifice is to enter the order.

The Cārvāka materialist school had no compunction with regard to the Vedas but most of its works are lost. The Advaita philosopher Śrī Harṣa, who lived in the twelfth century CE, wrote an epic poem about Nala’s adventures which Phyllis Granoff, the leading expert on his philosophic work, called ‘lusty’. Here is how Śrī Harṣa presents Cārvāka, tucked away by Surendranath Dasgupta in an appendix to the first and hidden at the end of the third volume of his monumental *History of Indian Philosophy*:
>
> The scriptural view that the performance of sacrifices produces wonderful results is directly contradicted by experience, and is as false as the Purāṇic story of the floating of stones. It is only those who are devoid of wisdom and capacity for work who earn a livelihood by the Vedic sacrifices, or the carrying of three sticks, or the besmearing of the forehead with ashes. There is no certainty of the purity of castes, for, considering the irrepressible sex-emotions of men and women, it is impossible to say that any particular lineage has been kept pure throughout its history in the many families on its maternal and paternal sides. Men are not particular in keeping themselves pure, and the reason they are so keen to keep the women in the harem is nothing but jealousy; it is unjustifiable to think that unbridled sex-indulgence brings any sin or that sins bring suffering and virtues happiness in another birth; for who knows what will happen in the other birth when in this life we often see that sinful men prosper and virtuous people suffer?

Early Buddhism was very ascetic but adopted a Middle Way. Buddha rejected the extremes he had tried himself under the guidance of Yoga masters before he reached enlightenment. Buddhism was, accordingly, faulted by adherents of more severe traditions. Rarely fair or balanced, they may be amusing as is the following quote from a Jaina source, translated from the German translation by Hermann Oldenberg in his monograph *Buddha: His Life, His Doctrine and His Order*:
>
> Resting on a soft bed during the night,

> Followed by a good drink in the morning.

> Eating before noon, drinking in the evening,

> Sucking sweets before dozing off—

> Finally reaching Supreme Enlightenment:

> Thus goes the fancy of the Śākyamuni.



### Entering the Order, Women and Sexualities

Buddhism consists of three parts: Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. We have touched upon the former two but it is the Sangha or Order that exhibits the most important differences between Buddhism and the Vedas. Institutionalization like that of the Buddhist Sangha existed already in Jainism. But Jainism remained isolated and conservative and never seems to have posed a challenge to Vedic Indians. The Rigveda describes wandering sages, but they do not seem to belong to sectarian groups and the Vedic nomads were wandering anyway.

We have read what the Buddha taught: ‘the highest achievement of sacrifice is to enter the order.’ Leaving society to enter the Order and become a monk is subject to numerous monastic rules and engaged in a plethora of additional rites, and is concerned, like the Vedas, with ritual *orthopraxy* or ‘correct practice.’ Buddhism insisted, in addition, on *orthodoxy* or ‘correct opinion,’ in the first place for monks and for laymen to a limited extent. The Mahāyāna challenged the distinction between monks and laymen. Other monks chose isolation after ordination and retired to the forest. They are still found in Myanmar and Thailand.

The Buddha’s teachings address all living beings but the large majority of Buddhist monks were converted from the three higher classes which, at the end of the Vedic period, were beginning to be defined. One innovation was that birth could be followed by a second birth, the initiation of *upanayana* that culminated in the Gāyatrī mantra as we have seen in Chapter 11. Entering the Sangha is also a second birth and becoming a monk was marked by the *upasampadā* ritual, in many respects similar to *upanayana* and certainly inspired by it.

What about women? They were subservient to fathers, husbands and sons, ties they could break if they entered the order. The *upasampadā* could have been adapted as the *upanayana* had been. Just as Vedic women could wear ‘the upper garment in the manner of the sacred thread’, nuns could have adapted the monk’s robe to their needs. But that is not what happened.

Tradition has it that the Buddha allowed only men to become monks, but that his favourite pupil, Ānanda, pleaded for the admission of women. The Buddha told him that, if he were to permit it, the Sangha would last five hundred years instead of a thousand. Even so, he consented and admitted women as nuns, provided they would be kept separate from the monks. His prediction turned out to have been wrong—Buddhism has lasted for two-and-a-half millennia, though women have again been excluded from ordination in Theravāda countries.

In Buddhism, eligibility does not depend on class or caste. Handbooks of monastic discipline exclude only one category of humans from entering the order. They are *paṇḍaka*s, often translated as ‘eunuch’ but, in fact, transvestites and/or passive homosexuals. One of the stories about them describes a *pa*ṇḍ*aka*, just admitted to the order, who went up to a group of young monks and asked them to make love to him. They said: ‘Away with you, *pa*ṇḍ*aka*, we don’t want you\!’ Thereupon, he approached a group of older monks who gave the same answer. Finally, turning to the elephant keepers, he was satisfied.

The reason for the exclusion of *pa*ṇḍ*aka*s has nothing to do with the murky reasonings that have recently re-emerged from the Vatican, Evangelicals and others with regard to gays. It is practical. It is not easy to decide whether the *pa*ṇḍ*aka*s must be regarded as male or female and the difficulty arises where they should be housed: in monasteries or nunnaries newly to be established? Also, would laymen provide the funds?

Homosexuality thrives in monasteries as it does in armies. Not much is known about it in the Buddhist monasteries of India; more is known about China and a great deal about Japan, where monks were running after novices and pages as well as women. Does it reflect intrinsic differences in sexual mores between India, China and Japan? I believe it reflects different periods of history, different sources and other differences that I have not yet been able to ferret out.



### Ahiṃsā and the Public Domain

In spite of the special cases that have just been described, the Buddhist teaching or Dharma is open to everyone: it is *public*—like the Upaniṣads became eventually. The Aṇguttara Nikāya, an early Buddhist Pali text, declares: ‘Three things are hidden and not public: the wife, the mantras of Brahmans and erroneous views. Three things shine in public and are not hidden: the moon, the sun and the dharma.’ This is a magnificent piece of public relations though it did not prevent the eventual disappearance of Buddhism from India after ca. 1,000 CE.

Performances of large Vedic rituals were generally hidden but they became public in India after the 1975 performance of the Agnicayana that has been described in the Preface. At that time a discussion arose about the sacrifice of goats which belongs in the present chapter. Vedic Indians were not vegetarians. Non-violence or *Ahi*ṃ*sā* was prescribed by Jainas and by Buddhists. It has become widespread among brahmins and in modern India, especially since Gandhi overthrew British colonial rule by strictly non-violent means. Many Nambudiri brahmins opposed the sacrifice of goats accordingly; or were unhappy about it. In 1975, I was visited by a delegation of Jaina monks who described the implications of violence to living beings. All I could do is explain that our personal feelings were irrelevant and that it was our task to record whatever would happen. Earlier, in the area of Udipi, where many Jainas live, Vedic brahmans had used figurines of animals. After much discussion, the Nambudiris decided to replace goats by packages of rice flour, put in banana leaves in the manner this is done for the ancestors at other rites.

In 2003, it was explicitly recognized that Vedic ritual was becoming public when a successful performance of a Soma ritual by Nambudiri brahmans took place in Trichur, Kerala. It was successful also in financial terms, partly because a Dakṣiṇāmūrti shrine, erected at the edge of the ritual arena, attracted donations from large numbers of visitors, increasing rapidly day after day. The event was attended by T.P. Mahadevan and myself and what we witnessed did strike us as a turning point in the tradition. So far, ritual eligibility for the performance of Vedic ritual had not, or not yet changed. I know one Nambudiri girl who recites Rigveda, but the Trichur performance represents a new Śrauta model in the sense that its *patron* changed: it was the public at large.

The first who characterized it as such was the Udgātā priest of the 2003 performance who mentioned it to T.P. Mahadevan in private conversation. He said that it was a *parasya*, that is ‘public’ performance. The ritual may be on its way towards the ‘public domain’, but its roots are firmly planted in Indian history and Sanskrit semantics. The term *para-*, in the sense of ‘public’, has a venerable history in Kerala astronomy and mathematics. The *Parahita* system of astronomical computation was introduced in Kerala in 683 CE. A Malayalam commentary explained its name as ‘being accessible to all people’. But the discussion started with Buddhism and its clear demarcation between what is hidden and what is public. Buddhism wavered about women, but it conquered the world by being accessible to everyone.



### Eschatology and Karmic Arithmetic

We are now ready to return to the thesis of Gananath Obeyesekhere, discussed in Chapter 10: in matters of life and death around the world, rebirth is the default option. I showed in that context that rebirth does occur in the Vedas but did not comment on Gananath’s other thesis: the Buddhist concept of rebirth is ethical unlike the Vedic varieties. I believe that is only partly true. Vedic ideas about rebirth display features that are ethical such as notions of merit and demerit. They refer to ‘ritual’ and ‘good’ acts at the same time because they are not clearly distinguished from each other. The same is true of Buddhism as we shall now see.

Buddhism’s great step was—I quote Lamotte—‘to place action in the mind’. It is explicit in the ‘Four Noble Truths’ which mention desire and clearer in Mahāyāna texts ascribed to the Bodhisattva layman Vimalakīrti: ‘pure mind is the root of good acts; divided mind is the root of bad acts.’ This is close to Yājñavalkya’s statement in the BĀU with mind being added as had *manasā* from the beginning \(Chapter 2\).

Desire is also mentioned in the BĀU and in a different context. Death desires: ‘Would that a second body be born for me’ \(BĀU 1.2.5\). Later in the Upaniṣad, Prajāpati teaches ‘DA’ which means *dāmyata*, ‘self-control’, *datta,* ‘charity’ and *dayadhvam*, ‘compassion’ \(BĀU 5.2.1–3\), all ethical notions.

If the Vedas are familiar with the ethical interpretation of good and bad actions, the question remains why did Yājñavalkya not want to discuss it in public. I believe that there is another explanation besides those given by Śaṇkara and Obeyesekhere for Yājñavalkya’s reticence. That explanation applies to Buddhism as well as Vedic and later Indic religions and I shall characterize it as ‘Karmic Arithmetic’ or ‘tit-for-tat’. It is eminently possible that Yājñavalkya regarded it as simplistic and unethical and thought it was therefore, better not to declare openly that: ‘a man turns into something good by good action \(*pu*ṇ*ya karma*\) and into something bad by bad action \(*pāpa karma*\).’

Figures 25 and 26 show some pictorially striking illustrations of ‘Karmic Arithmetic’ or ‘tit-for-tat’ from later Buddhism. I show them for the same reason as the later Indic representations of spoke-wheeled chariots in Chapter 2: we lack pictures in Vedic studies but we have them in later Indic art.

The illustrations that follow are realistic, of high artistic quality, and come from the greatest monument of Buddhism, if not of classical Indic civilization: the Borobudur of Central Java which was built around 800 CE. They occur on the so-called ‘hidden base’ of the monument, called after the fact that it needs to be covered most of the time by large blocks of stone in order to prevent the entire construction from sliding down the hill. By carefully removing the blocks from each portion whilst keeping all others in place, Dutch, Indonesian and French Sanskritists, Sinologists and archaeologists have been able to show that the hidden reliefs correspond to descriptions preserved in Chinese translations of largely lost versions of a Sanskrit Mahāyāna Buddhist text, the *Karmavibha*ṇ*ga* or ‘The Divisions of Karma’, one of several texts known by that name. This discovery inspired Jan Fontein, art historian, archaeologist and museum director with a good knowledge of Sanskrit and Chinese, to write an illustrated account of the reliefs and the corresponding phrases in Chinese that explain them in precise detail. They show that there is nothing ‘ethical’ about the Buddhist doctrine of karma as it is expressed there because it works in the purely literal and automatic fashion of ‘tit-for-tat’.

One relief \(Figure 25\) shows on the right a wealthy couple seated on the gallery of their house. The husband points his finger at some people that are obviously regarded as ugly. They are ridiculed by two others, standing behind them. The latter are as fashionably dressed as the couple and belong to the same family. On the left, the next relief portrays the same couple as they are reborn themselves equally ugly: the wife has hanging breasts and a child on her back, the husband has fallen on the ground. They are now in turn ridiculed by others who will be ridiculed themselves in their next birth, etc.

Another frieze \(Figure 26\) shows a similarly prosperous couple, smugly seated on their verandah, grinning at low-class street musicians who are begging in their garden. Unfortunately, we have no relief to show what happened to them in the next life but the text is clear and we can easily guess.

Why have I spent time on Tit-for-Tat? Because there is nothing ethical about it: it is entirely mechanistic, like Descartes’s idea of the life of animals. And yet, it seems to be widespread not only in Buddhism but all over the world. Whether the Buddha himself taught any such interpretation of the doctrine may be deemed unlikely. It seems certain that he accepted the idea that desires and intentions determine one’s future destiny in a general manner. I don’t know whether he thought that merit and demerit can be quantified exactly. That idea is not found in the Upaniṣads either. They rather expatiate on the opposite: all desires are extinguished but fulfilled in the absolute which is a true *nirvā*ṇ*a* though the term is not used. The Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad expresses the synthesis or identity that is the end-point of the Vedic perspective as follows: ‘When one’s desires are fulfilled, and one’s self is made perfect, all desires disappear in this very world.’ The theistic Upaniṣads introduce gods. The Śvetāśvatara declares that the Lord is free from desires. I have not treated these later Upaniṣads in Chapter 10 because they go beyond the end or final period of the Vedas.

Buddhist hells are a related matter and are not Vedic. The Vedas refer to Yama, god of the underworld and ruler of the spirits of the dead. The Rigveda does not tell us much about him. He builds a house for the dead and his arrival there is announced by a pigeon. A word for hell, *naraka*, occurs for the first time in the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka but we are spared the gruesome tortures that became a favourite topic in popular Buddhist religion, all over Asia, with Yama reappearing as the infernal judge. In China, he assumes the features of a magistrate with mandarin cap and gown. It is in the description of pain that the similarities between Buddhism and the monotheistic religions in other parts of the world become painfully manifest.



### Conceptual Problems

We may now turn to the more exalted level of philosophy in the Vedas and Buddhism. Both seem to accept an absolute. That applies in the Vedas primarily to the Upaniṣads and in Buddhism especially to some philosophies. The common perception is that the Upaniṣadic *brahman* is positive. It is described as ‘fullness’, *pūr*ṇ*am*, as we have seen. The corresponding Buddhist negative is expressed as ‘emptiness’ \(*śūnyatā*\). It plays an important role in Buddhism unlike the ‘nothing’ of the CU, furthest away from Buddhism in time and space, where no special attention is paid to it. The BĀU accepts an absolute to which it refers as *neti neti* as we have seen. It seems to exhibit the distinction made in some European philosophies between metaphysics or ontology, which deals with what there is \(e.g., an absolute\), and epistemology, the theory of knowledge, which asks how we can know or describe it, e.g., ‘in the negative’, as by *neti neti*. The distinction is obsolete because it cannot be expressed in Chinese and is, therefore, not universal, as A.C. Graham has shown.

There are conceptual or logical problems with absolutes and fullness and emptiness in particular. It is not mere sophistry like the argument that starts from the true premise that a half-empty glass is also half-full; and concludes, after mutiplying by two, that empty is the same as full. The most serious difficulty that affects all absolutes is that they are all alike. An absolute is defined by having no attributes that distinguish it from anything else. It is *anirvacanīya*, nothing can be asserted of it. But if ‘emptiness’ or ‘nothing’ is different from ‘fullness’ or ‘everything’, one of them must be different from the other in at least one respect which provides it with an attribute so that it is not an absolute. I conclude that absolutes are not only all alike, they are all identical. It is similar to an apparent paradox inherent in Spinoza’s belief in ‘God or Nature’. It was accepted by religious people, who were happy that nature was god, and by Marxists, who were happy that god was nature. But it does not support either because Spinoza’s identity is a symmetrical relation: *a* = *b* is the same as *b* = *a*.

Kamaleswar Bhattacharya has looked into similar problems in the context of the allegedly Buddhist statement that the self does not exist. He quotes Buddhist texts that declare unambiguously that it does exist. Bhattacharya admits that in some early Buddhist sources the self was ‘negated’. But these refer to the aggregate of the *skandha*s, ‘aggregates’ or ‘sheaths’, such as feeling or volition, that are *erroneously* identified with the self.

These problems are of interest because they are alluded to in one of the very few passages in the Buddhist canon that are believed to have been uttered by the Buddha himself—not exactly, to be precise, since he spoke in a Middle Indo-Aryan dialect or Prakrit that was subsequently translated into Pali and only then committed to writing in Sri Lanka in the first century BCE. The early Buddhist traditions were orally transmitted, like the Vedas, but without the special Vedic techniques and precautions of the Oral Tradition that belong to Late-Vedic \(see Chapter 4\). Hence the enduring uncertainties about what the Buddha said.

With these provisos, the Buddha is reported to have declared at the second sermon in Benares with reference to each *skandha*: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not myself.’ Even a person without Pali can understand how the words express what they seek to express—when carefully looked at: *n’etam mama* ‘this is not mine’—*n’eso ‘ham asmi* ‘I am not this’—*na m’eso atta* ‘this is not myself.’ It is almost Sanskrit \(note that Pali *atta* corresponds to Sanskrit *ātman*\), later adapted by Buddhist philosophers because it enabled them to discuss with other Indic philosophers. These expressions are as famous as the Upaniṣadic *tattvamasi*. But the Buddha does not say that the self does not exist. It is only the ‘imagined *ātman*’ of the *skandha*s that does not exist. This is one reason that I quoted Yajñāvalkya, at the outset of this book, explaining to his wife that there is no awareness of specifics after death.

Early Buddhist texts mention *brahmans*. This may refer to learned men or to the class or caste. Often, no value judgements are attached. Some of the first converts were themselves brahmans by birth—Mahākaśyapa, as we have seen—and respected for that reason. Other ‘brahmans’ were criticized, especially because of their fondness of rituals—the same commodity that in due course invaded Buddhism itself. Harsher expressions are used in post-canonical Buddhist writings. One text says that brahmans are ‘prattling liars’ \(*asatpralāpa*\). Another, proffering a philosophic variant of Kautsa, that what the Vedas say is constantly changing, which belies any claims about their immutability. In later times, Buddhist philosophers and the philosophers of the Mīmāṃsā refuted each other with avalanches of argument. Śaṇkara, to whom I referred as an Upaniṣadic philosopher, had his go at Buddhism when commenting on the Brahmasūtra’s sūtra: *anusm*ṛ*teś ca*, ‘and on account of memory’. It is a cryptic refutation as a sūtra is expected to be, but the context is clear: the empirical fact that we have memory refutes the Buddhist notion of ‘momentariness’, i.e. the doctrine that nothing is permanent and that reality consists of a series of unconnected moments.

Śaṇkara’s argument is a good example of ‘ordinary language philosophy’, but also a good argument. He starts with two statements that refer to memory. One says: ‘I remember what I saw yesterday’ and the other: ‘I remember what you saw yesterday.’ The first is a statement about memory. The second is not: it is a statement about what you saw. I may know about it, but I cannot remember it. Only I can remember what I saw. Since I remember what I saw, there is continuity of the ‘I’ and no series of unconnected moments.



### Dharma and Cakra

Buddhism made use of Vedic terms and concepts not only because it was part of the current language. It also inherited and made judicious use of the spoked wheel \(*cakra*\) of early Indo-Aryans and Indo-Europeans. It accounts for the name of the Buddha’s first exposition of his doctrine as *Dharma-cakra-pravartana*, ‘the setting into motion of the wheel of Dharma’. *Pravartana* is derived from *vartana* which comes from the verbal root *v*ṛ*t*—and was used around 1380 BCE in Kikkuli’s Mitanni treatise to refer to the ‘turns’ that horses are taught to take in the course of their domestication as we have noted in Chapter 1. The wheel of the Buddhist Dharma, was set into motion by the Buddha in the Deer Park at Sarnath, outside Benares. It is depicted in Theravāda and Mahāyāna Buddhist art, beginning with Sanchi and throughout the Buddhist world. It has even been adopted by the Bonpos of Tibet but they turn it in the other direction.

*Dharma-cakra-pravartana* was another fortunate choice of Buddhists who were concerned about public relations. The entire expression consists of ideas and words with venerable Vedic antecedents and prefigurations. The eleventh verse of the puzzle-poem 1.164 in Chapter 15 sums up the Vedic evidence for the theory of *dharmacakra*. It deserves to be quoted in full:
>
> The wheel of time with its twelve spokes

> Turns around and around the sky and never ages.

> Here, O Agni, the sons stand in pairs,

> Seven hundred and twenty.

The first thing we notice is that a word for *time* takes the place of *dharma.* The original is ṛ*ta*, often interpreted as a principle that governs the Vedic universe. ‘Setting into motion,’ *pravartanam*, is expressed by a rare Vedic form of the same verbal root *v*ṛ*-*, the *intensive* which is a strong expression and uses a reduplication: *varvarti*. It was explained by the medieval commentator Sāyaṇa as *puna*ḥ *punar vartate* ‘turns again and again’. Seven hundred and twenty is two times 360 and obviously refers to the days and nights of a year of twelve months. The Vedic calendar according to Vedic astronomy was more precise: it comprised 366 days, adding one day about every sixty-four months in order to preserve the relation between ritual dates and lunar phases \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*\).

In the Vedic instance, *dharma* is ‘time’, but it is not a single thing: there are many *dharmas*. This is expressed towards the end of the hymn by other famous lines which the reader will understand by looking at the original and a literal translation: *yajñena yajñam ayajanta devā*ḥ */ tāni dharmā*ṇ*i prathamāny asan*, ‘the gods ritualized ritual with ritual / those were the first *dharmas*.’ Here the dharmas are generally translated as ordinances or principles. There are several different ones and not a single *dharma* as in the Buddhist case \(if we exclude the *dharmas* or ‘constituents’ that occur in some Buddhist philosophies\).

The cakra occurs in Vedic not only as a wheel but also as a weapon. Rigveda 2.11.20 says of Indra: *avartayat sūryo na cakram*, ‘he hurled forth his *cakra* like the sun.’ The *avartayat* of ‘hurled forth’ is again derived from the verbal root *v*ṛ*-* of *pravartana*. In English, such a *cakra* is called a discus. It has a disk-like shape and refers to the disk of primordial resplendence which is the sun. Vishnu generally holds the weapon in his right upper hand, but in some early images it is on his left. In the art of Kashmir, Vishnu wears a turban which sometimes resembles those of early Kushan Bodhisattvas, and the right hand seems to be in *abhaya mudrā*, the gesture of fearlessness which is an artistic and iconographic borrowing from Buddhism.

A Sāmavedic Brāhmaṇa, the Pañcaviṃśa, described a *sattra* ritual which has a complex structure and is defined in terms of a large number of *stuti*s: ‘By means of this *sattra*, Prajāpati came to set in motion the whole universe.’ All these compositions are pre-Buddhist. That does not hold for all of the Mahābhārata, which refers in similar terms to the Naimiṣa forest where ‘according to the laws of an earlier creation, the wheel of *dharma* was set in motion.’ The bards may have been familiar with or inspired by Vedic or Buddhist antecedents or both.

Jainism and Buddhism contributed not only to the end of the Vedas or Vedānta, but evolved new ideas. Foremost among them are the decline of dharma through four ages \(*yuga*\) and the endlessness of *kalpa*, a term that in later Vedic meant ‘possible’, ‘practible’ or ‘ritual’. Romila Thapar has quoted colourful illustrations. One Buddhist text imagines an enormous mountain, brushed with a silk scarf every hundred years: when it is eroded, a *kalpa* has passed. An Ājīvika construct starts from a huge river, 117,649 times \(that is, seven to the sixth power\) the size of the Ganges. If every hundred years a grain of sand is removed from the river bed, that will be one *sara.* One *mahākalpa* equals 300,000 of these and 8,400,000 are needed to complete the transmigration of a soul. These calculations are based on the large numbers of Vedic mathematics. Thapar calls them ‘a fantasy on ciphers’.

Monks must have used these large numbers to spread fear and kindle the desire for Nirvāṇa. In due course, it spread beyond Buddhism to the Purāṇas, which looked not at Buddhism but sought legitimation in the Vedas whose authority they did not question though they did not know their contents. The only hope for the future became Kalkin, the tenth *avatāra* of Vishnu and a counterpart to the Maitreya Buddha.

The Vedic revival of the Gupta period \(320–500 CE; *Seven: Yajurveda*, PART V: THE VEDAS AND BUDDHISM\) affected mostly the upper classes, now castes. It also marked a revival of Buddhism and those monks who wrote Sanskrit treatises were converts from the same classes. Like Buddhism, the Guptas spread from Magadha, mirroring Vedic movements of the past, first to former Kurukṣetra and the Western Gangetic plain and later over large parts of the subcontinent, excluding only the south. The Gupta revivals included arts and sciences incorporating Vedic studies, sometimes under Buddhist patronage.



### The First University and Buddhist Logic

After the Vedas, Sanskrit became the language of learning with Prakrit or Prakrits as close seconds in Buddhist circles. Many traditions remained oral but after Aśoka \(268–231 BCE\), writing began to be used. With the development of cities, some became known for their Sanskrit learning. Most famous were Kāśī, Varāṇasī or Benares in the north and Kānchīpuram in the south. Buddha’s first sermon, the *Dharma-cakra-pravartana* of the previous section, took place at Sarnath, just outside Benares. Kānchī became a centre of Buddhist learning later. During my last visit to its numerous temples, I came upon a large image of the Buddha kept in the garden of the police station.

Sanskrit learning was transmitted by pandits in their own houses and sometimes at the courts of chieftains or kings. The Vedas were transmitted not only within families but through *Vedapā*ṭ*haśāla*s. Medicine prospered in close association with clinics and hospitals which were patronized by emperors like Aśoka. Libraries were attached to many centres of learning and especially to Buddhist monasteries.

The first large universities in the modern sense were organized by Buddhist monks and financed by Buddhist laymen. Buddhist learning was increasingly expressed through Sanskrit, a classical language that possessed greater precision than any modern language. The Theravāda, which was studied in Valabhi in the west, may still have paid attention to Prakrits, but the earliest and most famous university was Nālanda in the east. The medium of instruction was Sanskrit which had been adopted by all Mahāyāna schools and philosophies in order to be able to interact with others. Many courses were taught by Buddhist monks, carefully selected for their learning. The basic curriculum consisted of Sanskrit grammar and logic. Specialists were attracted from elsewhere for mathematics, non-Buddhist philosophies, medicine, astronomy, fine arts, politics and the art of war.

Students came to Nālanda from all over Asia and were free to study what they wanted provided they passed an entrance examination. The working day for teachers and students was eight hours, indicated by a water clock. At the end of the year, academic degrees were granted according to the students’ qualifications. Most students wisely limited their studies to a few disciplines. Some were familiar with more but only the most famous of a series of rectors or chancellors, Śīlabhadra, was claimed to have understood all topics. Philosophy and the logic of perception and inference were especially popular among young scholars.

The University of Nālanda is the first university in the history of mankind. Reportedly founded in 427 CE, at the end of the Gupta period, it was located near Pāṭaliputra or Patna, the same region where Śīkalya and Yājñavalkya had excelled many centuries earlier, a few hundred miles south-east of the birthplace of the Buddha. How are we so well informed about these matters?

Our information is due to Chinese pilgrims who came to India to study not only Buddhist subjects but scientific topics, especially medicine. Chinese as well as Indians, and not only Buddhists, looked upon Buddha as Bhaiṣajya Guru, the Great Healer. Chinese scholars and scientists, soon joined by Koreans, Japanese, Tibetans and others, studied Sanskrit for the same reason Europeans were to study Arabic later: it gave them access to new developments in the sciences.

The most important Chinese visitor was Xuanzang \(Hiuan-tsang: 602–64 CE\) who was in Nālanda between 629 and 646 CE. We know much about him because of his student and biographer Hui Li. Both left detailed information on Sanskrit and Sanskrit grammatical works, not known from any other source. After mastering Sanskrit, Xuanzang spent five years studying the philosophy of the Yoga system under the tutelage of Śīlabhadra. When he had become famous as a scholar himself, Xuanzang started teaching courses and made many friends with whose help he collected manuscripts that were copied for him on the spot. On the way back to China, he lost one horse-load of them when crossing the Indus. He had a list which he sent back to India, requesting replacements.

The next important visitor from China was I-tsing \(634–713\) who spent some fifteen years at Nālanda. His description of the curriculum is very detailed. He mentions the names of the Sanskrit works that were taught, beginning with Pāṇini and Patañjali and adding known and unknown works by Bhartṛhari and others. In the mean time, Nālanda had begun to decline. It came to an end when the buildings were destroyed by Muslim invaders.

The most recent information about Nālanda comes from two sources. The first is Amartya Sen’s book *The Argumentative Indian*. It contains a picture of Xuanzang’s caravan loaded of boxes with books carried on the backs of horses. Xuanzang found India very hot and when, in the end, he wanted to return to China, his Indian friends and colleagues argued that he should stay. Sen quotes in full what they said:
>
> India is the land of Buddha’s birth, and though he has left the world, there are many traces of him …. Why then do you wish to leave having come so far? Moreover, China is a country of barbarians who despise the religions and the doctrine. That is why the Buddha was not born there. The mind of the people is narrow, and their coarseness profound, hence neither saints nor sages go there. The climate is cold and the country rugged—you must think again.

Xuanzang replied with two counter-arguments. Without questioning the first premise, he disputed the inference by invoking Buddhist universalism: ‘It is true that the Buddha established his doctrine here so that it might be diffused to all lands. Who would wish to enjoy it alone, and to forget those who are not yet enlightened?’ He thereupon disputed the second premise because it was not in accordance with the facts:
>
> Besides, in my country the magistrates are clothed with dignity and the laws are everywhere respected. The emperor is virtuous and the subjects are loyal, parents are loving and sons obedient, humanity and justice are highly esteemed and old men and sages are held in honor. How then can you say that Buddha did not go to my country because of its insignificance?

Recently there seem to have been attempts to revive Nālanda. My only information is a letter of December 2006 in the *International Herald Tribune* by Jeffrey Garten, a professor at the Yale School of Management. It refers to a forthcoming meeting in the Philippines, where senior officials from India, Singapore, Japan, etc., are scheduled to discuss what to do with $500 million that still have to be raised \(\!\), to build the university and develop the roads and other infrastructures. Garten is right that ‘a bolder vision is in order.’ His thoughts are about training future leaders and move in the direction of religious dialogue, but he displays his ignorance of Asia’s universities when he writes that they have ‘a long way to go to be in the top tier’, by which he means Harvard, Yale or Columbia. Nor does he seem to be familiar with what has happened in India during several decades and is happening in India, China and the US right now.

In India, the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Mumbai and several national institutes of advanced studies, some of them founded or inspired by Jawaharlal Nehru, have flourished for many decades. I am not referring to the Indian schools that produce 184,000 engineering graduates annually \(as against 71,000 in the US in 2003\). I am writing about small institutions where top scientists do creative work on basic science.

Relevant facts about American universities are that many of the best graduate students in the sciences have been Asians because American students ‘are no longer hungry or ambitious’, as Paul Kennedy put it, adding about the Asians that ‘most of them will be teaching and working in India and China.’ It sheds much light on Nālanda: students kept going there as long as it was the best centre of learning they could find. But there was competition, not only in India. The institution of public examinations in China, Korea and Japan pre-dated Nālanda. It was the foundation for the reforms that Chinese pilgrims made in Chinese Buddhism after their return from India. This led to the formation of translation centres in Central Asia where Sanskrit was translated into Chinese. Central Asia was and remained a meeting point of Indian and Chinese sciences throughout the millennia.

Neither Amartya Sen nor Jeffrey Garten mentions logic which was as basic at Nālanda as the study of Sanskrit. Xuanzang displayed his mastery when discussing the relative merits of India and China. How do we know these facts? It’s the logic, stupid\!

Buddhist scholars made important contributions to Indian logic. Before Patañjali used logical techniques in linguistics, around 150 BCE, Kauṭilya had written a work ‘for the edification of princes’ in which he introduced *ānvīk*ṣ*ik*ī or ‘investigation’. Centuries later, an author of the *Nyāyasūtra*, now known as ‘the Ancient School of Indian Logic,’ declared that, *nyāya* is the same as *ānvīk*ṣ*ik*ī.

Buddhist logicians criticized the ancient school and initiated the ‘Medieval School of Indian Logic’ which was in due course replaced by the ‘Modern School of Indian Logic’ or *Navya-Nyāya* which criticized both predecessors. Buddhist Logic does not include the work of the famous Nāgārjuna who tried to demonstrate the absurdity of all intellectual notions and the logical impossibility of all experience like a medieval Derrida. The greatest Buddhist logician was Dignāga who lived around the time of the probable foundation of Nālanda and introduced what we would nowadays call *formal* logic. He constructed the eightfold *Hetucakra* or ‘Wheel of Reasons’. It puts together all possible combinations of reasons and conclusions in a table of eight of which two corresponded to the Old Nyāya. This work is lost in the original Sanskrit but was translated into Chinese and became known as *Hetuvidyā*, the ‘Science of Logic’.

I participated in a conference on *Hetuvidyā* which took place in Hangzhou near Shanghai in 2006. Earlier, I had attended a ‘masterclass’ convened by Sheldon Pollock on ‘Comparative Intellectual Histories in Early Modern Asia’ at the University of Leiden, The Netherlands. The Hangzhou conference and Leiden masterclass throw light on the study of Buddhist logic within the wider perspective of Indology and Buddhology which, because of ever increasing degrees of specialization, have greatly diverged from each other. Leiden and Hangzhou also diverged but they mirrored and complemented each other, like the routes of Vedic and Buddhist on the frontispiece. The Leiden participants who knew Sanskrit did not know that, in between the Old and the New Nyāya, there had been a medieval Nyāya which was Buddhist. Some participants at Hangzhou, who knew Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese, assumed that *Hetuvidyā* was Indian logic and there was no other logic in India.

A third international meeting, after Leiden and Hangzhou, took place in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing and was called *Strings 2006*. I referred to it already \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*\) and need only add, that the statement of the official from Chinese Academy of Sciences predicted the transfer of academic eminence from the US and Europe to India and China, no one knows how soon. The rest of Asia would follow suit once it was discovered that business administration or management are not enough and that there is no technology, economics or a future without basic sciences which include subjects such as physics, logic and Vedic studies.

Nālanda was a great university that was more than a debating club or dialogue between religions. It was based upon the logical study of facts and a further step in the tradition and evolution of the Vedas and Upaniṣads towards universal knowledge. *Viśvatomukham*, ‘looking in all directions’, is the starting point of *viśvavidyālaya*, ‘university’, storehouse of knowledge, *vidyā* or *veda*, hence its inclusion at the end of our discovery of the Vedas.



### Final Conclusions

The Vedas are not all of a piece and it would be unreasonable to expect a single final conclusion about them. What I can do is make a few remarks about Buddhism and the Vedas and try to place them in a wider perspective.

Vedic civilization does not offer us a founder, order or doctrine. Buddhism provides the Buddha and the Sangha, but if we look at its many schools and ramifications, it is clear that it does not offer a single doctrine either. There are many similarities in ideas propounded by the Vedas and doctrines taught by Buddhist schools at different points during their long careers.

The term *nirvā*ṇ*a* does not occur in the early Upaniṣads but is not uncommon in later Sanskrit, as a near synonym of *mok*ṣ*a* in some of its meanings. Lamotte’s formula is clear enough: ‘Nirvāṇa is a clear and precise vision, embracing the Noble Truths and penetrating in depth the general characteristics of things—impermanence, suffering and the impersonality of phenomena—as well as the peace of Nirvāṇa’. Any comprehensive knowledge about the universe including ourselves will have to ‘penetrate in depth the general characteristics of things’ and enlighten us about the human condition.

The University of Kyoto is a great university for many reasons. Not only is it one of the best centres globally for Sanskrit studies, but it has a weekly seminar with a tradition of inviting visiting scholars to give a lecture. The faculty sit around a large table and there are many extra chairs for graduate students. The seminar starts at 2 o’clock and after the talk, which may last for an hour or more, people do not leave but stay on, not to drink tea \(though they do drink tea\) but to ask questions and discuss until the end of the afternoon.

I was fortunate to give such a lecture and the discussion became wide-ranging. A distinguished scholar of Buddhism, himself a Buddhist, raised the question: Would the Buddha have known what a modern physicist knows? A silence fell and people looked at me because I had given the lecture \(which had nothing to do with Buddhism\). But the chair intervened—perhaps it was five o’clock—and said we had had a fine discussion. I do not blame him.

What could I have said? I was ready to say: No, he could not have known. One reason is related to the talk I had just given: the level of mathematical knowledge during Buddha’s time would not enable anyone to formulate what is now known in physics because it can only be done in an artificial language, and the first that might have been suitable, the language of algebra, was not known then and there. Could there have been a clear vision of what holds the universe together and what, if any, might be our place in that world?

Should one delve into the matter, starting with the universe, and check out whether any of the large numbers divined by seers and sages of the Vedas, authors of Jaina and Buddhist works, bards of the Epics and theologians penning Purāṇas, are the ones we seek? Even if they were thinking of cows, there is no need. With so many large numbers to choose from, lots will correspond to those that physics and cosmology need now or later. According to recent estimates, perhaps already outdated, the age of the universe is only 109 or 209 years. The characteristic size of particles is about 10–15 of a meter and the radius of the observable universe about 1027 meters. Even if we add 15 and 27 as an exponent of 10, it is only a fraction of what India has come up with. Contrast the story of creation in the Jewish Ancient Testament, accepted by Christians and repeated in the Qur’ān: it took six days. Heaven was a garden, the Garden of Eden or ‘Adn, believed to be located in Mesopotamia.

In our corner of the universe, we still have not resolved problems of impermanence, suffering, the impersonality of phenomena and least of all peace. As for knowledge, we have little. Physicists tell us that 2 per cent of the universe is now known. About life we know less, and about the development and history of our own species much less. Perhaps we have not been selected for such tasks, our priorities are wrong, or both. But even monotheists have not failed to note—provided they were learned like Pascal—that ‘our intelligence occupies in the order of intelligible things the same rank as our body in the vastness of nature.’
