+++
title = "14 Sūtra: Vedic Sciences"

+++





### The Concept of Science and its Ancient History

Science is universal, but the concept of science varies in different cultures. English *science* is different from French *science*, German *Wissenschaft,* Japanese *gaku,* Russian *nauka*, etc. English *science* refers to what it regards as the ‘exact’ sciences, viz., mathematics, physics and other so-called ‘natural sciences’. The French and the other quoted terms include human, life, social and other sciences. They are all exact in that they strive for explicitness and avoid contradictions. The definition I adopt is the widest I could find within these constraints: science is the search for systematic, exact and highly confirmed knowledge of the universe which includes, of course, ourselves. Thus defined, science is similar to *veda*. However, it recognizes more clearly and explicitly the duality of facts and logic.

The history of science is not a random enumeration of sciences that are found throughout history or at different times. Structure and development are inherent in it. Einstein understood more than Newton and Newton more than Aristotle. Medieval Indic mathematicians understood more than their Vedic predecessors and Srinivasa Ramanujan understood more than both. The history of science exhibits not only a gradual widening of knowledge but also a deepening of insight. It is on this history that technology and much else depend. None of this implies that progress is always made. There is no dearth of dead ends; mistaken assumptions have reigned for centuries before they were abandoned and there must be much that is irretrievably lost. We should not therefore regard ancient sciences as more or less clumsy attempts to express modern scientific ideas. But even worse is to think that each science reflects a particular culture. Vedic mathematics is mathematics before it is Vedic. Modern science is not ‘Western’—a term that should be avoided anyway, just as much as ‘Eastern’, ‘Occidental’ or ‘Oriental’. ‘Modern’ science is modern in that it represents the most recent phase, for modern is a relative term; what is modern today may not be modern tomorrow. Science is universal in precisely that sense, and is universal by its very nature.

What does it mean: ‘Science is universal by nature’? Imagine we want to transform a rectangle into a square with the same area. There are many ways to do it, but Greek and Vedic geometers devised the same method in a similar ritual context. It would seem likely that one influenced the other but as it happens, the particular solution they arrived at originated in ancient Mesopotamia. In other cases, solutions may have been arrived at independently. All we know is that there were opportunities for Greek, Vedic and Chinese mathematicians, astrologers or astronomers and other scientists to meet their colleagues in Iran, Alexandria or Central Asia. If they could find a solution to a problem, it did not matter where it came from. It does not even require a common language. And there were no governments or pharmaceutical companies trying to prevent it.

If we study the history of ancient and medieval science, we must reckon with two major insights that have been evolved by historians of science over the last half a century, roughly speaking from Otto Neugebauer and Joseph Needham to David Pingree \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*, *note*\). These insights are based upon the textual and historical study of source materials in the classical languages of science that include Arabic, Old-Babylonian, Chinese, Greek, Latin and Sanskrit. The first insight is based upon empirical results, that is, facts; the second upon epistemological analysis, that is, upon a reflection of how we are able to know facts.

The first insight is that ancient and medieval science can only be adequately understood if the Eurasian continent is treated as an undivided unit. It is depicted in Figure 19, which portrays some historical relationships between Eurasian sciences. It shows first of all that Mesopotamian science is earlier than Indian and Chinese. It influenced both in the areas of astronomy and mathematics. Furthermore, it implies that Indic science does not stand alone and cannot be studied by isolating it artificially from the remainder of the Eurasian continent. That is not an obvious fact: it has been established by empirical study. There may be links between that large unit and scientific developments in Africa, but not, for example, with Meso-American cultures which grew in total isolation until the sixteenth century.

The second insight was formulated with special force and clarity by Joseph Needham, whose monumental work is not only about China, but abounds in information on Indic, Near Eastern and European sciences: ‘to write the history of science we have to take modern science as our yardstick—that is the only thing we can do—but modern science will change, and the end is not yet.’



### The Traditional List and the Concept of Sūtra

The Vedic sciences are not objects that moderns are at liberty to make up. Much is known about them and what we know is in accordance with a traditional classification of sciences that belong to the late Vedic period. This was anticipated by a more adventurous or generous list in the early Chāndogya Upaniṣad \(7.1.1–4\). It uses the term *vidyā* which is closely related to *veda*, both meaning ‘knowledge’. The Chāndogya passage starts with sage Nārada asking Sanatkumāra, ‘Eternal Youth,’ to teach him what he knows. Sanatkumāra returns the question: ‘Tell me first what you know. Then I’ll tell you what more there is to know.’ Nārada gives a long reply in which he refers to the four Vedas, the corpus of histories and ancient tales, ancestral rites, mathematics, soothsaying, the art of locating treasures, and the sciences of ritual, spirits, government, heavenly bodies and serpent beings. ‘All that, sir, I have studied.’ Eternal Youth responds wisely: ‘All that is nothing but names.’

A later and more realistic Vedic classification refers to seven sciences as *vedā*ṇ*ga,* ‘limbs of the Veda’. The word ‘science’ is an apt interpretation of *a*ṇ*ga*, ‘limb’, provided we interpret ‘science’ not in the idiosyncratic English manner.

I have counted the Vedic sciences as seven though the first two are combined. Their names with rough translations into English are: ritual \(*kalpa*\) to which geometry \(*śulba\)* is attached; phonology/phonetics \(*śik*ṣ*ā*\); etymology \(*nirukta*\); grammar \(*vyākara*ṇ*a*\); prosody \(*chanda*s\) and astronomy/astrology \(*jyoti*ṣ*ā*\). All were orally conceived and transmitted.

Two features of this list deserve notice. The first is that the science of ritual stands in front which is in accordance with the findings of our Chapters 7, 9 and 12. It is also consistent with our chronology because *kalpa* is the subject of the Śrauta Sūtras, which overlap in time with late Brāhmaṇas and early Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads, all earlier than the traditional Vedic limbs. We have seen that the Śrauta Sūtras consist of detailed descriptions and provide a theoretical and analytical account which justifies their inclusion among the ‘limbs of the Veda’ and in this chapter. The second special feature of the list is that four of the sciences deal with language. That is strikingly different from the entire Euro-American development in which these sciences, despite the fact that language is the chief characteristic of our species, have always played a relatively minor role. As for philology, an ancient and venerable discipline, it is not a science of language but is concerned with texts.

The science of ritual is the first in which the notion of *sūtra* or ‘rule’ comes to the fore. I have used that term often but not explained it so far. Literally, it means ‘thread’ and belongs to a family of related terms and concepts that originated in the domain of textile manufacture. Many of these terms are applied to scientific works: *grantha*, ‘knot’, *tantra*, ‘loom’ or ‘warp’, *nibandha,* ‘tying’, *prabandha*, ‘band’ or ‘tie’, etc. *Sūtra* or ‘rule’ suggests a scientific work in which objects are woven together in the manner in which strands are sewn/woven/turned together into a thread. Rules contrast with ‘enumeration’ \(*saṃkhyā*\) because they are analytic and tend towards generalization and universalization. In the introduction to his Great Commentary *\(Mahābhā*ṣ*ya*\) on Pāṇini’s grammar, the grammarian Patañjali explained that the expressions of language cannot be enumerated because they are infinite in number. Unlike an analytical science that makes use of rules, an enumeration would never reach the end. Patañjali concluded that a treatise of rules and exceptions must be composed instead. Pāṇini’s grammar is that treatise. It is Vedic in spirit because *brahman* and *vāc* were both regarded as infinite. But it is not Vedic in extent because it described and analysed the spoken language of Pāṇini’s time.

A common definition of *sūtra* of later date is that it ‘consists of a few syllables, not leading to doubt, containing the essence of a topic, fully explicit, without embellishment and faultless.’ The term I have translated as ‘embellishment’ is none other than the Sāmavedic stobha. The concept of sūtra was soon deepened and widened. Deeper insights into language led to the concepts of meta-language and of *paribhā*ṣ*ā* or ‘metarule’. Metarules are rules about rules \(*Thirteen: Secrets of the Sadas*\). Like other technical concepts of the science of language, their roots lie in the science of ritual. An example is ‘The rule “he deposits Brick A” comes before “he recites mantra B for brick A”.’



### The Science of Ritual

Following the order of the ‘limbs of the Veda,’ we begin with the science of ritual. It deals with many more scientific concepts than the notion of ritual evokes in a modern mind. There is nothing in modern science that corresponds to such a discipline unless it is directly inspired by it, like Hubert and Mauss. It is a science because it provides systematic and highly confirmed knowledge of ritual structures such as self-embedding and other forms of recursiveness mentioned or alluded to in Chapters 11 and 12. Other civilizations have been interested in the study of ritual—the Confucian and Taoist in China and the Orthodox and Catholic during the European middle ages—but it is unlikely that they attained the high level of technical and theoretical sophistication that we find in the Śrauta Sūtras because they lacked the close interaction between ritual and grammar that characterizes Vedic science. Some technical concepts of the Vedic science of ritual anticipate linguistics, modern logic and computer science.

Since we have come across illustrations from the Vedic science of ritual in earlier chapters, I shall illustrate it in the present section with another notion which exemplifies at the same time the concept of metarule: the notion of *default*. Its practice is clear: what I type on my keyboard appears in *roman* on my screen because that is the default option; it appears in *italics* when I push additional keys or move the mouse accordingly. Its theoretical status is clear: it is a meta-concept.

In the domain of *śrauta*, the road that led to these discoveries was paved by practical abbreviations in the formulation of rules. They have to be studied with the same care as formulas in a textbook of mathematics. For example: ‘whichever among the divinities have secondary names, for them \(mantras are recited\) in low voice or softly; as for the others, loudly, provided there is an explicit statement.’ Similarly: ‘when there is no special statement, the usual one about the sacrificial fees prevails.’ In this last statement, ‘the usual one’ refers to the default option.

Metarules for default are illustrated by all the Śrauta Sūtras and are explained in simple terms by Āpastamba. It singles out default options for oblations, priests and implements such as ladles. It begins with specifying the default oblation as clarified butter. It means that the oblation is clarified butter if nothing else is stated. The default priest is the Adhvaryu. It means that he has to perform the job at hand if no one else is specified. The default implement is the *juh*ū ladle. There are degrees of default: when the *juh*ū is already used, and no other implement is specified, the oblation has to be made with the help of the *śruva.* The notion of default is common among the grammarians and the notion of multiple default occurs in Pāṇini’s theory of syntactic relations or *kāraka* which is preceded by the metarule: ‘\(the following rules apply\) when it \[i.e., the *kāraka*\] is not \(already\) expressed.’

Metarules about default are formulated in the sūtra style which is terse and brief, as laid down in the definition. The rules of Āpastamba are exemplary and I shall list them as they appear in Sanskrit to illustrate that brevity. The first rule is long, but part of it is implicit in the next three: *juhotīti codyamāne sarpirājyam pratīyāt*, ‘if offering is stated, clarified butter is implied’; *adhvaryu*ṃ *kartāram* ‘Adhvaryu \(is\) the agent’; *juh*ūṃ *pātram ‘juh*ū the ladle’; *vyāp*ṛ*tāyā*ṃ ś*ruveṇa*, ‘if already employed, the *śruva*’.

The science of ritual was the first to display the kind of brevity of expression about which a later grammarian wrote: ‘grammarians rejoice over the saving of half a syllable as over the birth of a son.’ But brevity is not sought for its own sake. It expresses the most general solution to a particular problem as Paul Kiparsky has explained.



### Geometry

Vedic geometry is attached to ritual because it is concerned with the measurement and construction of ritual enclosures \(such as the ritual arena of Figure 15\) and of altars \(Figures 21–22\). Our knowledge is based to a small extent upon the living tradition, but more complete information survives in the Śulba Sūtras. The most important are Baudhāyana, Āpastamba and Mānava, which are attached to Śrauta Sūtras of the Black Yajurveda, and Kātyāyana which is attached to the White. The term *śulba* means rope. Ropes and pegs are used for measurements, to mark a straight line or circle and construct a square, rectangle, trapezium or straight line parallel or orthogonal to another.

A common problem in Vedic and Greek geometry was the construction of a square equal in area to a given rectangle. It was applied to the construction of altars. The Vedic geometric tradition seems to preserve earlier forms. Eight of them are squares which consist of sun-fired bricks that are themselves squares and rectangles or oblongs. Six are assigned to priests and situated in or near the Sadas. They include the altars of the Rigvedins in Figure 20. All are identified with the ritual patron: they are *his* altars. That means: they are functions of or relative to his size. The patron’s size is measured from the tips of his fingers, raised above his head, to the ground.

The uncommon patterns that these altars display are not only described in the Śulba Sūtras, but supported by archaeology, for similar patterns of slightly larger square altars have been excavated by Jarrige and other French archaeologists at Pirak at the foot of the Bolan Pass \(Frontispiece, 8\). The dates lie roughly between 1500 and 1200 BCE when Vedic Indians had already settled there. Eight of these altars are depicted in Figure 20.

They are arranged in increasing complexity in order to present a reconstruction of Proto-Geometric evolution. The similarity between altars from the Sadas and the excavated variety is striking. The reader is invited to identify which is which as a kind of exercise. \(The answer is given at the end of the Geometry section on *Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*.\)

The development illustrates how altars known from the later Vedas are situated within the period of those that were excavated at Pirak—a result that is in accordance with our present understanding of the sequence of development and the absolute chronology. There is one exception: Number 8. It fits nicely in the sequence but comes from Greece where I found it near the famous temple of Poseidon in Delphi. I inserted it for good measure, but the two experts on Greek architecture I consulted, say that the altar is a late construction and has nothing to do with my Vedic altars. I don’t dare to doubt them.

Next in complexity is the domestic fire altar of the Soma ritual, a square consisting of five layers of bricks that are fired in a kiln. It replaces the small square at the eastern end of the Ancient Hut in Figure 16 \(referred to on Seven: Yajurveda\). The origin of the Vedic word for brick, *i*ṣṭ*akā*, is non-Indo-European though it is Sanskritized in appearance: it comes from the lost language of the BMAC \(‘Bactrian-Margiana Archaeological Complex’\) of Central Asia \(6, on the Map\). Each of the five layers consists of 21 = 3 x 7 such bricks. Each brick is rectangular and the lengths of its sides stand in the proportion of 7 to 3 so that each layer is square. The total number of bricks is 5 x 3 x 7 = 105. The configuration of bricks in the first, third and fifth layer faces one direction, that of the second and fourth the other direction that is perpendicular to it. See Figure 21.

The configuration of the thousand bricks in the offering altar of the Agnicayana ritual is much more complex. There are five layers of 200 bricks each, and the altar has the shape of a bird. The bricks are not only square or rectangular. Some are triangles of various sizes and shapes. Numerous rules have to be followed when the bricks are ‘piled’, for everything must fit. It signals the beginning of geometry proper and can be dated with some measure of probability because some of the mantras, with which the bricks are consecrated, occur in the earliest Yajurveda Saṃhita, the *Maitrāya*ṇī, about 1,000 BCE. Figure 22 depicts the configuration of bricks in the first layer.

The bricks may be deposited in any order, but the numbers in the Figure indicate the order in which they are consecrated with mantras.

Vedic geometry developed from the construction of these and other complex altar shapes. All are given numerous interpretations in the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas, enumerated in lists and competing with other lists that show, by their mutual inconsistencies, that they are purely arbitrary—food for mythologists or psychologists of the Jungian variety, perhaps. But most of these shapes are also found in ancient Greek geometry which adds three-dimensional varieties such as the cube. India and Greece seem to be related, the Indic being the earlier because it was less developed. But the relationships may be more complex since Greece and India both derived mathematical knowledge from the Old-Babylonians who had developed it a millennium or more before.

The Old-Babylonians were also conversant with the so-called Pythagorean triples, e.g., 5, 12 and 13 with the property that 52 \+122 = 132 \(in our modern notation\). The Śulba Sūtras contain the earliest extant verbal expression of the closely related theorem that is still often referred to as the Theorem of Pythagoras but that was independently discovered by Vedic Indians, Greeks and Chinese. The theorem is expressed in identical terms by Baudhāyana and Āpastamba: ‘the diagonal rope of an oblong produces both what the flank and the horizontal ropes produce separately.’ Put differently, the sum of the areas of the two squares constructed on the flank and the horizontal equals the area of the square constructed on the diagonal.

The figure that was in the minds of Baudhāyana and Āpastamba and that they must have pegged with ropes in sand or on the ground, is illustrated in Figure 23. It has been preserved in manuscripts of later date. The numbers that have been added reflect the ‘Pythagorean’ triangles I mentioned just now. These and other such triplets were undoubtedly known to Baudhāyana and Āpastamba but they did not write them down. The words that I have added could not have been written by them either since they were not familiar with the art of writing.

The Theorem of Baudhāyana \(as it is now often called in India\) was not proven in the Śulba Sūtras as they have come down to us. Perhaps a proof was added by the teacher and remained part of an oral tradition. A diagram of later date suggests that a proof was known to Bhāskara I in the first half of the seventh century CE.

Chinese mathematicians discovered that theorem during the Han Period \(202 BCE–220 CE\). A proof was given in algorithmic form by Liu Hui in 263 CE. It corresponds to the sketch in \(Appendix I\) where it is explained.

Pythagoras, who was born about 570 BCE on the island of Samos, may or may not have discovered the theorem named after him. It was probably a discovery of the Pythagoraean school which was active in the sixth and fifth centuries BCE in ancient Greece and Italy. It became a theorem between then and around 300 BCE when Euclid included it in his *Elements* together with a proof. This could be around the same time as Āpastamba or a little later and certainly later than Baudhāyana. Before we discuss the implications of this, the reader may like to take a look at the proof that Euclid gave in his *Elements* and that is not algorithmic or algebraic but purely geometrical. It is given, in Heath’s translation, in Appendix II. It is quite complicated, for two reasons. First, Euclid treats the general case, where the sides of the rectangle may have any length. That is unlike the Chinese case where the only rectangles that are considered have sides where the ‘horizontal rope’ and the ‘flank’ consists of units with lengths of 3 and 4, respectively. The other reason for complexity is that Greek and Vedic used geometry but not algebra. Algebra is much easier than geometry—for us. Newton and Descartes still regarded algebra as a barbaric art but they were getting out of date. Leibniz had already seen that algebraic notations were the way of the future.

The similarities between Greek and Vedic geometry go far beyond the identity of the two theorems we have discussed. Greek and Indic geometries are historically related but how can their relationship be explained? Certainly not by the fact that Greek and Vedic are Indo-European languages, for why did all those other IE speakers or their ancestors—Iranians, Tocharians, Slavs, Celts or Germans—not produce geometry? Another possibility is the Babylonians whose importance for the early history of Asian science I have mentioned several times. They developed mathematics and astronomy/astrology long before Greeks and Indians and influenced them both. At first, I speculated that Babylonian influence on Vedic geometry was unlikely because the Vedic/Greek variety was connected with altars and the Babylonian seemed to be inspired by celestial bodies. I concluded that both Greeks and Indians must have picked up the elements of geometry from the inhabitants of the BMAC who constructed large fortresses from square and rectangular bricks; and whose word for brick was adopted by the Indians. The idea is supported by the geography depicted on the Map: the speakers of Hittite and Mitanni, to whom arrow 9 points, lived in, or close to, what is now called Turkey or Asia Minor, a large chunk of land where Greek was spoken on the coastal regions and many Greek mathematicians originated. If speakers of Indo-Aryan passed through BMAC territory and picked up geometry it would have linguistic implications. The BMAC word for kiln-fired brick, *i*ṣṭ*akā*, would have been taken to India by Indo-Aryan speakers instead of being brought there by BMAC visitors or immigrants. The word occurs in the Yajurveda. It points to the Kuru period and region, an area where various cultures met.

I then met Jens Høyrup who knows mathematics and its history, Old-Babylonian and a great deal more. He explained that sections of Euclid’s *Elements* consist of ‘cut-and-paste’ results, long known from Babylonian sources. It seems likely, that Ś*ulba* geometry was in several respects influenced by the Babylonians. That Babylonian influence reached the Yajurveda is clear from the ‘mysterious sixty’ in the second recitation of the patron or Yajamāna: ‘May these bricks, o Agni, be milch cows for me’ \(Chapter 7, *Seven: Yajurveda*\). The number ‘sixty’ is prominent in the Rigveda itself.

\[Answers to Which Is Which \(Figure 20\): \#1 comes from Pirak; \#2–\#5 are Sadas altars; \#6, \#7 and \#9 come again from Pirak.\]



### Numbers and Infinity

We have so far looked at ‘Vedic geometry’, but is there no other mathematics in the Vedas? Though the term is used in several senses, there certainly is no trace of algebra. What about those very large numbers that we have come across \(in Chapter 7\) and what about the concept of infinity which is almost omnipresent in some form or other? I offer two observations, one speculative which takes us to a distant past, another factual which takes us to more recent times.

Starting from integers, we must make a distinction between *ordinals*, which are integers ordered in a series such as 1, 2, 3,…, \(as discussed in Chapter 11\) and *cardinals*, which refer to the number of elements in a set. The identity of cardinals may be known without knowing how many there are. For example, there may be many sheep in my corral and also many coins in the bag of a prospective buyer. If I let the sheep pass one by one through a gate and take out a coin whenever a sheep passes, I may discover that there are as many sheep as there are coins without knowing what is the number of either. Let us say that two sets which contain the same number of elements or members are *equivalent.* The discovery I just made is that the set of sheep and that of coins are equivalent. The set of my hands and that of my feet are equivalent also and so are the numbers of feet of elephants and dogs. The next step is to define a cardinal number as *a set of equivalent sets*. The number ‘2’, for example, is the set of all pairs—hands, feet, eyes, ears, etc. It does not imply that I know that ‘2’ comes after ‘1’ and before ‘3’ in the series of ordinals. Of course, I do know such things about 1, 2 and 3, but if there had been 164 sheep in my corral and 164 coins in the bag, I could have found out their equivalence without knowing that the number is 164. Other cardinals may be defined in the same way.

Does this ring a bell? The reader wil recall the nonsensical equivalences of the Brāhmaṇas of Chapter 7 on which even scholars who spent part of their life translating them have heaped invectives. Renou writes with greater dispassion and probably thinking of *bandhu*: ‘the hidden connections that they try to establish cannot be accepted; it is too visibly the product of the priestly mind.’ The reader will recall one of these litanies: ‘He offers with an oblation ladled up four times, cattle have four feet; thus he wins cattle; the quarters are four; thus he finds support in the quarters.’ Barring ‘sympathetic magic’—a common phrase but hardly an explanation—what is their significance? Do these foursomes of oblations, feet and quarters refer to a set of equivalent sets? Taken together, do they define the number ‘4’? Could that take us back to much more distant times, when our ancestors discovered cardinal numbers or did that happen later? These questions take us beyond the Vedas.

My second observation is about the infinite. It is referred to by several terms throughout the Vedas and is related to the very large numbers of the Yajurveda, etc., that verge on it. The infinite was loved throughout Indic civilization, but abhorred by the ancient Greeks, from Pythagoras onward. It was ultimately very productive in science and led, in the fourteenth century CE, to infinite power series of pi and the trigonometric functions that Indic mathematicians discovered three centuries before Newton and Leibniz, long after the Vedas.

Long before that, the infinite is also found in a poem about *pūr*ṇ*am*, ‘fullness’ that occurs or has been inserted in some Upaniṣads. Those who composed it understood the mathematical sense of infinity, i.e. something like the following.

Look at the interval between the integers ‘0’ and ‘1.’ Think of it as a small line segment: /————————/. There are infinitely many points on that segment. Infinitely many of those points, but not all of them, may be represented by *fractions* of the form ‘*m/n*’. This may be shown by cutting the segment into small segments of various sizes. To make it easier, I shall cut it in segments of equal size. We start by cutting the segment in four: /——/——/——/——/ with cuts at ‘1/4’, ‘1/2’ and ‘3/4’. Continue cutting each of those intervals in half, i.e.: ‘1/8’, ‘1/4’, ‘3/8’, ‘1/2’ ‘5/8’, ‘3/4’ and ‘7/8’. This may continue indefinitely. Now return to the interval between ‘0’ and ‘1’ once again and cut it in two pieces, anywhere. The argument we have gone through just now applies to each of the two pieces. It follows that even if we take an infinity away from the segment, an infinity remains:
>
> *pūr*ṇ*am ada*ḥ *pūr*ṇ*am idam pūr*ṇ*āt pūr*ṇ*am udacyate*/

> *pūr*ṇ*asya pūr*ṇ*am ādāya pūr*ṇ*am evāvaśi*ṣ*yate*//

> ‘Fullness is there, fullness is here, fullness from fullness proceeds,

> When fullness is taken from fullness, fullness remains.’



### ‘Vedic Mathematics’

A few paragraphs should be added about the book *Vedic Mathematics* by Bharati Krishna Tirtha Maharaja \(1884–1960\), former Śaṇkarācārya of the Govardhana Maṭha at Puri and published long after his death. \(A Śaṇkarācārya is pontiff of one of the four or five traditional schools of the Advaita Vedānta, founded by the original Śaṇkara according to tradition.\) A Hindi edition of *Vedic Mathematics*, called *Vaidika Ga*ṇ*itā,* and a revised English edition, published in Delhi in 1992, were reprinted many times in the following years. There are also active web-sites and a *Vedic Mathematics Newsletter*.

*Vedic Mathematics* is neither mathematics nor Vedic. It is not *mathematics* unless simple and sometimes fast ways of multiplying, dividing and factorizing numbers, together with other tricks that are playfully explained and appeal to children and unschooled adults, are glorified by that label. It is not *Vedic* unless we follow His Holiness who wrote in his *Preface* that it is ‘in the fitness of things’ that the Vedas include Ayurveda \(the science of life or medicine\), Dhanurveda \(archery\), Gandharva Veda \(the science and art of music\) and Sthāpatya Veda \(which deals with architecture, engineering, etc.\); and goes on to explain that his book is based upon an appendix of the Atharvaveda that no one had heard of or seen.

What we have seen is that *Vedic Mathematics* consisted very largely of geometry, in many respects similar to the ancient Greek variety and often going back to Babylonia. In Europe, it lasted until Newton whose *Principia* is still modelled after Euclid. In India, geometry was replaced by trigonometry and algebra almost a millennium before Newton. I did mention the remarkable progress that followed and led to the discovery of infinite power series. *Vedic Mathematics* is not a work of progress. It portrays regress, unadulterated regress.

Some say that introducing *Vedic Mathematics* into the curriculum was a deliberate effort to keep people ignorant and the masses of India backward. If modern India wishes not only to cooperate but also compete with China—and why should she not?—it would be good to give wide publicity to the international conference ‘*Strings 2006*’ that took place in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. Stephen Hawking and 800 theoretical physicists and mathematicians from all over the world were there, discussed the state of the art with each other and addressed an audience not of uneducated dreamers or fanatics, but of 6,000 Chinese graduate students.



### The Prātiśākhyas and the Padapāṭha

The classification of sciences as ‘limbs of the Veda’ with which we began includes four sciences of language. I shall try to simplify, reconstruct their salient features differently and treat them in three sections. The first examines the Prātiśākhyas and the Padapāṭha with which we are already familiar from Chapter 4.

The Prātiśākhyas are attached to each of the Vedic schools \(*śākhā*\) as their name indicates. It will be helpful, therefore, to caste another glance at Table 1 on *Four: The Four Vedas*. The most important is the Rik-Prātiśākhya. The Yajurveda, has one for the Taittirīya and another for the White Yajurveda. The Atharvaveda has two and the Sāmaveda possesses a number of compositions that deal with the many features of its ritual chants. Scholars have long discussed whether the early Prātiśākhyas pre-date the famous grammarian Pāṇini and if so, which of them. The fact is that their linguistic content is basically pre-Pāṇinian though the present form in which we know them has been influenced by Pāṇini’s grammar which in due course eclipsed them all because it went beyond the śākhās and described the spoken language of his time and place. This remark is relevant to the development of linguistic systems and to the chronological sequence of scientists and their works. There were Bloomfieldians left, chronologically speaking, after Chomsky’s first revolution, which does not contradict the fact that Chomskian linguistics was, among other things, a reaction against Bloomfield and, therefore, best understood and described as a new chapter in the history of linguistics.

The Prātiśākhyas deal mostly with what are nowadays called phonetics and phonology but their focus is on empirical completeness, not theoretical development. That explains their being formulated for each of the four Vedas separately, and being complete for each of those compositions. They often deal with *sandhi* or ‘euphonic combination’, the distinctive feature of the continuous speech of the *saṃhitā* which contrasts with the word-for-word analysis of the Padapāṭha as illustrated for the Rigveda in Chapter 4, which also gives an idea of some of its complexities. For *sandhi* is not a simple matter in Sanskrit. It occurs in other languages, but often on a smaller scale. It applies to the distinction in English between two forms of the indefinite article: ‘*an apple*’ before a vowel, but ‘*a banana*’ before a consonant. Important in our context has been the word *upa-ni-*ṣ*ad* where the dental *s* of *sad* ‘to sit’ turned into the retroflex ṣ of ṣ*ad* because of the preceding *i* so that *upa-ni-sad* became *upa-ni-*ṣ*ad*.

The Padapāṭha follows the sequence of verse and hymns in the Vedic corpus, that is, it marks the boundaries of words, stems, prefixes, suffixes, roots, etc., each time they occur. It does not make generalizations and the same holds for the Prātiśākhyas. They contain, therefore, much repetition but, at the same time, the result is an extremely extensive inventory and compilation of linguistic facts. These cannot be called ‘grammar’ or ‘linguistics’ because they do not deal with the infinity of a living language. On the contrary, they are concerned for each of the Vedas with a finite corpus of a large size. Within that corpus they sought and achieved completeness of description. Surya Kanta called the Rik-Prātiśākhyas ‘*entirely* free from all oversights’. W.D. Whitney noted on a section of the Taittirīya Prātiśākhyas, that he could not discover any case of a retroflex nasal in the Taittirīya Saṃhitā from a dental nasal in the Taittirīya Padapāṭha ‘that was not duly provided for’. This completeness provides a magnificent demonstration of Patañjali’s remark that enumerations, which may be complete for a finite corpus, cannot be used to characterize the expressions of a living language because they are infinite in number and therefore require a grammar that consists of rules.

The rules of the Prātiśākhyas are often concise. The rule that *t* becomes *l* when *l* follows is expressed as: *takāro le lam*. This metarule states: ‘a change \(in the *object*-language: i.e., of *t*\) is expressed as an Accusative \(*dvitīya* in the Sanskrit metalanguage: i.e., *lam*\) when *l* follows which is a Locative \(*saptam*ī\), i.e., *le*\)’. Other rules are longer because they apply to a number of cases, e.g., the definition of *savar*ṇ*a* or ‘homorganic’ as ‘having the same place, producing organ and effort of articulation in the mouth.’ Here, ‘place’ refers to throat, palate, teeth, etc. ‘Producing organ’ means tip of the tongue, rolling back the tip of the tongue, tip of the teeth, middle of the jaw, etc. ‘Effort of articulation’ refers to closed, semi-closed, open, etc. The close attention that is paid here to movements and processes within the mouth is in tune with the close attention paid to breath \(*prā*ṇ*a*\) throughout the Vedas.

All these discoveries are closely related to the oral tradition. They originated not *in spite of* the absence of writing but *because* of it.



### The Sound Pattern of Language

The second Vedic science of language as I have reconstructed it led to a major empirical discovery with profound implications for the methodology of linguistics. It was made by Vedic reciters who were engaged in composing Prātiśākhyas and constructing Padapāṭhas or were already familiar with them; and arrived at in stages during roughly the same period. Because the reciters did not think of changes in the Vedic language—what we interpret as such, for example, in the distinction between early, middle and late Vedic \(Chapter 4\)—they would interpret them as characteristics of different regions \(which was often the case\). They emphasized, therefore, what we would call synchronic linguistics, not diachronic philology. All the time they used purely empirical methods: they did not prescribe but describe. They went further than most modern linguists. They did not imagine that language starts from the larynx. They knew that its deeper source lies in the intention, that is, the mind or heart of the speaker. In so doing, they anticipated by more than two millennia the spirit of synchronic linguistics, initiated in Europe by de Saussure; and of psycholinguistics which began to develop in the twentieth century.

After reaching a sufficiently high level of sophistication, the reciters made the major discovery of which the likely beginnings are depicted in Figure 24. It illustrates how the sounds of a language are produced by constricting the vocal tract at a particular point along its stationary portion. If we move from the larynx or throat to the lips, we pronounce *ka, ca,* ṭ*a, ta, pa* \(the short *a*’s are added for the sake of pronunciation\). Each syllable exists unvoiced or voiced, provided with more or less breath, which may be made to pass through the nasal cavity. Thus we produce, in the case of *ka*, the sequence *ka*, *kha*, *ga, gha,* ṇ*a*; and similarly for the other four consonantal syllables. The two directions are combined in the two-dimensional square or *varga* that is depicted here. In order to complete the picture, a few more consonantal syllables have to be added along with semi-vowels and vowels.

The Vedic system of the sounds of language exhibits and embodies what is nowadays called phonetics, but is close to phonology, which studies features of those same sounds as parts of a system. The system exhibits universal properties of language. I do not imply that it is the same for all languages. Retroflexes \(*mūrdhanya*\), which have been put in a box, are common in Indic languages but do not occur in all languages. Whatever they are, the sounds of human speech may be accommodated in some such scheme.

As far as I know, the Vedic discovery of the sound pattern of language was made only once in human history. Modern linguistics uses distinctive features, but they would not exist if the sound pattern of language had not been discovered two-and-a-half millennia earlier.

The sound pattern of language was of great historical importance because it underlies many of the scripts of South, South-east and East Asia including Balinese, Bengali, Burmese, Devanagari, Grantha, Gujarati, Gupta, Gurmukhi, Japanese, Kannada, Khmer, Khotanese, Korean, Lao, Malayalam, Nepali, Oriya, Pallava, Sinhala, Tamil, Telugu, Thai and Tibetan. None of these were alphabets; all were syllabaries. This presents us with a paradox, because a strictly oral tradition influenced countless writing systems.

The discovery of the sound pattern of language was oral in two senses: it was concerned with the mouth as the place where language becomes audible and took place in an oral culture before the invention or introduction of writing. Neither was understood in western Asia or Europe and both are still beyond the grasp of most moderns who are not Indians. The most recent work on *The World’s Writing Systems*, a tome of almost a thousand pages, regards the Vedic syllabary as a kind of alphabet. The *Oxford English Dictionary* writes that a syllabary ‘serves the purpose of an alphabet.’ This is not so, and these verdicts are simply cultural constructs, based upon alphabets that arose in western Asia. These alphabets continue to cause problems of spelling and pronunciation in languages such as English, whether it is someone’s first or *n*-th language. Unlike ABC’s, to which there is no rhyme or reason, the Vedic syllabary is rational and practical like Indian numerals. Other Asians adopted and adapted it for those reasons.



### Notations and Artificial Languages

The third Vedic science of language as I have reconstructed it may be looked upon as a methodology but its significance is wider. The Prātiśākhyas introduced, along with rules and metarules, the beginnings of the metalinguistic study of language. To see what that means we should start with some simple facts about rules. Many rules of language are of the form ‘A > B’. This may be read as ‘A becomes B’ or ‘B is substituted for A.’ ‘A > B’ is a modern artificial notation. The Prātiśākhyas did not use variables such as ‘A’ and ‘B’ or expressions such as ‘\+’ and ‘>’, but other artificial notations. Their rules made metalinguistic use of the case endings of the object language, that is, Vedic. Thus two expressions, distinguished in English as ‘becoming’ and ‘substitution,’ correspond to a single artificial expression:
>
> A \+ Nominative ending, B \+ Accusative ending.

In order to apply this metarule or *paribhā*ṣ*ā*, we have to treat the element ‘A’ as if it were a Sanskrit word of the object language and attach the Nominative ending to it. Similarly for ‘B’ and the Accusative ending. We met with an example on *Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*: *takāro le lam*. The beginning of the Padapāṭha of Chapter 4 alluded to a case that is a little more interesting: two rules operate on three elements in order to explain \(in modern notation\):
>
> ā *\+ uru \+ aprā*ḥ *> orvaprā*ḥ.

The two rules are \(again in modern notation\):
>
> ā *\+ uru > oru* and:

> *oru \+ aprā*ḥ *> orvaprā*ḥ.

The question is in which order should they be applied.

I mentioned this case only in order to illustrate the level of sophistication we meet with in the Prātiśākhyas. They introduced other technicalities and artificial expressions. They did not combine into a full-fledged artificial language such as was created by Pāṇini for his grammar of the spoken language. His orientation was different but he stood on the shoulders of the Prātiśākhyas, other Vedic sciences of language and other early grammars.

There is more to Vedic linguistics but it is a technical topic and one should know some Vedic or Sanskrit to make it palatable. As it stands, our topics illustrate that Vedic linguistics led not only to the foundation of the science of language, but to the concept and formation of an artificial language. It shows in passing that artificial languages are not only found in sciences such as mathematics or physics and in modern civilization, but exist across sciences and civilizations.



### Astronomy and Astrology

The reader need not raise eyebrows about the combination of astrology with astronomy during the Vedic period. It is and has been common all over the world for a long time. The combination occurs in pre-modern and even in early-modern science. Kepler, Tycho Brahe and Newton were all interested in astrology though Newton’s real passion was alchemy. I shall be brief on the entire subject and rely on Michio Yano and the late David Pingree who died on 11 November 2005, when I was struggling with a first version of the present section.1

I can do no better than begin by quoting and endorsing the opening phrases of a chapter published by Pingree in 2001:
>
> This is a topic that has elicited for over a century many fanciful and implausible interpretations on the alleged astronomical meaning of the Vedic texts. In this chapter I have tried to avoid such fantasies and to restrict discussion to the overt meanings of passages where the authors of the Vedas clearly are referring to astronomical phenomena or are describing some aspect of astronomical theory.

The Rigvedic contribution to astronomy does not appear to have been very remarkable. It did not distinguish the five planets \(*graha* in later texts\) from the fixed stars. The Vedic term *jyoti*ṣ*ā*, which comes from *jyoti*ḥ, ‘light \(in the sky\)’ or ‘luminary’, is not very distinctive either. That lack of distinction is not altogether surprising. It reflects semi-nomadic origins. Astronomy flourishes in sedentary civilizations which are able to concentrate on the skies from a fixed point and during prolonged periods of time. The Vedic astronomy/astrology may have been conceived in basic outline before the Vedic Indians were settled. It explains that later Indic astronomy was very different.

The main purpose of the *jyoti*ṣ*ā* was the preparation of a calendar in order to fix the dates when rituals have to be performed. The calendar that was arrived at divided the year into 366 days. An adjustment was needed—adding one day about every sixty-four months—in order to preserve the relation between ritual dates and lunar phases. The term *nak*ṣ*atra* in *jyoti*ṣ*ā* was restricted to twenty-seven or twenty-eight groups of stars that were regarded as lunar stations along the ecliptic. In the system of twenty-eight, the distance between the *nak*ṣ*atra*s is irregular. The two systems are also found in Chinese and Islamic astronomy—the former probably an independent development and the latter influenced by the Indic.

Solar and lunar eclipses were famously attributed to a demon who pierced the sun and the moon with darkness. Later called Rahu, then *graha*, literally ‘seizer’, he came to refer to any of the five planets. The demon myth was ridiculed by the astronomer Lalla who wrote in the eighth or ninth century CE: ‘if you are of the opinion that an artful demon causes eclipses by swallowing, then how is it that an eclipse can be determined by calculation?’

Late Vedic texts were not only inspired by Mesopotamian mythology and omens but influenced by Babylonian astronomy. The transmission was facilitated by the establishment of the Achaemenid Empire, which included in the sixth century BCE the Gandhara area on the upper Indus, now part of northern Pakistan. Mathematical astronomy came also from the Near East but that was in the second century CE, more than half a millennium after the Vedic period. It is then that astronomy began to flourish and the five schools called *siddhānta* were established. One of these, the Paitāmaha \(‘ancestral’\) school continued the *vedā*ṇ*ga* tradition, but it disappeared after having been rejected by Varāhamihira \(ca. 550 CE\), a ‘Zoroastrian/Maga Brahman’ allegedly descended from Iranian Magi, who wrote about the five schools: ‘the Pauliśa is accurate, that pronounced by Romaka \(‘Roman’\) is close to it, the Sūrya is more accurate and the remaining two have gone astray.’ Should it be held against Vedic astronomers that they were largely wrong? It is not an uncommon occurrence in the history of science as Āryabhaṭa, al-Bīrūnī and Keppler explained to us in Chapter 9.




