+++
title = "03 Steps Beyond Kautsa"

+++

Kautsa gave four reasons for the meaninglessness of mantras. \(1\) The sound of mantras may not be changed unlike in language where sounds may change provided meaning remains the same. \(2\) The order of elements in mantras may not be changed, unlike in Sanskrit where word order is to a large extent free. \(3\) If mantras were meaningful, it would have to be conceded that they are often contradictory or inconsistent with each other. That is not uncommon in language, where it is common for speakers to say different things, but it becomes an embarrassment when dealing with canon formation, i.e. the establishment of a source of authority. \(4\) There is a tradition to transmit the sounds of mantras but not their meanings, unlike the connection between sounds and meanings in language that is sometimes taught but generally picked up by children. It is the last reason with which I have been chiefly concerned in the previous section and to which we shall return most often.

Before we do so we must note that there are other reasons which Kautsa might have mentioned. A reason \(5\) to which we have referred already in Chapter 8 is that mantras are repeated incessantly. It may be expressed by a simple recursive rule of the type we have studied in the previous section. In English, we may say: *Please, please, please pass me the salt* if we have already asked before and are repeating our request. It sounds a little odd, and if we were to repeat *please* four times it would definitely be looked upon as eccentric. Mantras, on the other hand, are happily repeated. It holds not only for mantras like OM, which are repeated many times and during long periods without intermission, but for mantras couched in language such as the Gāyatrī mantra which an ‘orthodox’ brahman repeats every day. *Orthodox* \(‘of right opinion’\) is not the appropriate term here because such repetitions involve ritual where *orthoprax* \(‘of right action’\) is the correct appellation as we shall continue to observe.

If Kautsa’s perspective had not been confined to Vedic India and he had been able to look beyond its borders and to the future, he would have come up with at least two other reasons in support of his thesis: mantras remain invariant in history \(6\) and in geography \(7\). They are different from language in these respects. Languages change over time and change across language boundaries where they are translated. Mantras do not. Though often kept secret and guarded jealously, some Vedic mantras were inherited by Buddhists and Tantrics. Often referred to as *dhāra*ṇī, they travelled from India to South-east Asia, crossed the Himalayas from Kashmir into Central Asia, China, Korea, Japan and Tibet, and finally reached the Euro-Americas. The emperor of China accepted them in exchange for tea, silk, porcelain and lacquers and in California they fetched high prices. During these travels, the mantras did not change. That mantras are untranslatable, like proper names, was recognized by Chinese pilgrims such as Hiuan-tsang \(Xuanzang\) who were translators themselves.

When a mantra is introduced into a new linguistic environment, its forms may be affected to some extent. Though OM remains the same in Tibet or Japan, SVĀHĀ is adapted to the phonetic structure of Japanese where it became SOWAKA. Within India itself, mantras couched in Vedic such as the Gāyatrī were preserved without change, but the language of the reciters changed from Vedic to other Indic languages. Maintaining the original forms of a ritual language is advocated in a similar spirit with respect to Latin in the Catholic Mass and Arabic in the Qur’ān. Reasons\(6\) and \(7\) illustrate again that what counts for mantras is not *meaning*, let alone social contexts, but *form*. Emphasis on form is a basic feature of ancient Indian civilization and accounts for much of its emphasis on explicit statements, its scientific creativity and many of its other strengths.


