+++
title = "04 Pragmatics, Speech Acts and Bird Song"

+++

If mantras are not language, for the analysis of which specialized disciplines such as linguistics, philology or literary criticism have been developed, where do we find more adequate concepts and categories to study them successfully? Can we learn something from logic or philosophy?

A popular approach to the study of mantras has been *pragmatics*. I am not referring to the pragmatism of William James, John Dewey or other philosophers, but to a discipline that is closely related to logic and that deals with so-called indexicals. Bertrand Russell called them ‘egocentric particulars’. These expressions of language do not refer to the outside world but to the speaker in his or her immediate context or situation. Examples are: ‘I’, ‘you’, ‘here’, ‘now’ or ‘to-morrow’. What is the difference between these and other expressions of language? If the reader and I say ‘tree’, both of us refer to the same thing. If we both say ‘I’, the reader refers to the reader and I refer to myself. If we say ‘you’, the reader refers to me and I refer to the reader. In both cases, we use the same words but do not refer to the same things.

Within the domain of pragmatics, a productive subcategory of indexicals or egocentric particulars is that of ‘speech acts’. These were introduced by J.L. Austin, the Oxford ‘ordinary language’ philosopher, refined by his former assistant Paul Grice and by John Searle, both at Berkeley, along with others. Many students of mantras have argued that mantras are speech acts. What are speech acts?

Speech acts are language utterances by which an act is performed. They depend on context and on the speaker, and are therefore indexicals. The only language from which empirical evidence for the existence of such a separate category has been studied on a large scale is modern English. Speech acts have uncommon properties. They depend on the qualification of the agent who utters them. If a priest or minister addresses two people with the words: ‘I unite you in marriage,’ he has not merely said something. He has performed an act by which the two are now married to each other. If a non-qualified person such as myself addresses two people with the same words, it has no effect. It is an utterance of speech, but not a speech act. The people addressed may also have to meet special requirements. They may be required to be two in number and, in many places, of different sex or gender.

Most of the utterances of language are not speech acts. If I say ‘it is raining’, it may be true or untrue depending on time and place, but its meaning is the same and I have not performed an act. If I say ‘I promise to see you tomorrow’, the meaning varies with the referents of the indexicals \(‘I’ and ‘tomorrow’\) and it may or may not be an act, depending on my character. If I am a reliable person who keeps his promises, I have bound myself to someone else and staked my reputation. In that case, it is an act and, therefore, a speech act.

Some scholars have widened the domain of speech acts beyond Austin so as to encompass *all* utterances of language. It illustrates one of the great strategies of empty scholarship. If *all* objects of an inquiry are labelled with a new name, nothing has changed and no new insight has been obtained. A new name may carry a whiff of suggestion; but if the name already denotes members of a particular class, the suggestion is confusing. Calling an utterance an act is such a misleading suggestion. For we would still have to distinguish between acts that merely speak and acts that ‘really’ act. If I kill a person with an axe it is an act and not an utterance.

I conclude that mantras are neither language nor speech acts. Their powers are different and distant from the concepts and categories that are used in logic, philosophy and the human sciences. That is in accordance with a simple fact that we have not so far taken into account: mantras are not confined to humans. That has never raised an eyebrow in Indic civilization, and other civilizations like it, which do not regard humans as basically different from other animals. The Upaniṣads accept it as a matter of course that needs no further discussion. The Chāndogya tells us about dogs that are gathered around a white dog and said to him: ‘Please, Sir, find us some food by singing\!’ They sat down together and made the sound *hu*ṃ. Then they sang: ‘OM\! Let us eat\! OM\! Let us drink\!’

If the human sciences cannot make sense of mantras—just as they throw no light on elephants or mice—it stands to reason that we should widen our net and study them in the context of the animal kingdom. It is a productive approach with plenty of empirical support. Animals chirp, grunt, bark, moo, bellow, roar, mew, cry, twitter and twit. Many of these sounds belong to structured systems and some of them have been studied in detail and depth. I shall confine myself in our context to one of the richest, most varied and impressive animal sound systems: bird song. It has not been studied by humans as long and deeply as human language, but there exists an extensive literature about it. The study of bird song has not led to unanimous conclusions with regard to its meaning or semantics, but its *syntactic* study, though in its infancy, has been fruitful and the results are uncontroversial.

The syntactic study of bird song was initiated by a composer and musicologist, François Bernard Mâche, who discarded the traditional use by ornithologists of spectrograms. Spectrograms show continuity. Mâche used musical and other symbolic notations that show that bird song consists of discrete, digital units. The units of bird song may be referred to by notes, letters or approximated by transcriptions into the English alphabet such as *chyup, chup-chup-zee*, or *churrr*. As we have seen in Chapter 6, musical notations are helpful in the study of the Sāmaveda, where no one would even think of using spectrograms. Their use has been common since the Renaissance when the Jesuit polymath Athanasius Kircher studied a bit of Sāmaveda.

The Sāmaveda illustrates clearly that not only language but also stobhas, a type of mantras, possess a syntax that consists of discrete units that are combined with each other and may be converted into other structures by syntactic rules. Such rules transform one sequence—*agna āyahi vītaye*—into another: *o gnā i / ā yā hi vā i / tā yā i tā yā i /*. Some were formulated in the *Pu*ṣ*pasūtra*, a late work that belongs to the Kauthuma school of the Sāmaveda. The syntax of stobhas is extremely complex as I have illustrated elsewhere \(Staal 1989, 1993, Chapter 19\).

The syntactic structures of language, mantras and bird songs are generally different but sometimes overlap. Mantras are in some respects closer to bird song than to language. It is difficult to evaluate the significance of such a fact because the comparative study of these three distinct domains has remained virtually unexplored and would need to be embarked upon before we know where mantras belong, if anywhere. In the present section, I shall briefly discuss two examples from the domain of mantras, leaving a third for the following section which deals with ritual. Example 1 illustrates a feature that is shared by mantras and bird song but is absent from language. Example 2 illustrates a feature that is found in all three domains. Example 3 illustrates again a feature that ritual possesses and mantras in its wake, but that is absent from language.

Example 1 is the simplest and we have met with it already: mantras and bird songs both repeat the same sounds indefinitely: A A A A …. The recursive rule is: **A > AA**. Language does not have such a rule because utterances like *please, please, please* soon have to stop as we have seen.

Example 2 exhibits a more basic structure of which the repetitions of Example 1 may be regarded as the simplest and least interesting case. I am referring to the *recursiveness* that is a property of the syntax of human language and that we have already met in the section on language \(*Eleven: Mantras*\).

Linguists have claimed that recursiveness is a basic characteristic of human language and is not found anywhere else. Mantras and bird song provide two counter-examples to this claim. Let us begin with mantras with which we are already familiar. The clearest examples come again from the Sāmaveda. Sequences such as *bhu bhā bhi bha bhe bha bha bh*ī *bhā bha bha bhi bha bha bhā bha* \(above *Six: Sāmaveda*\) are created by replacing the syllables of the underlying song by syllables that retain their vowel but substitute for their initial consonant or consonants *bh-*. It is a process that can be continued indefinitely with respect to the number of syllables or sentences, as in: *it is a bhobhess bhat bhan bhe bhonbhibued inbhebhibhibhebhy*, etc., but this is not a procedure we find in a natural language.

We need to spend a little more time on the case of bird song which may be unfamiliar to some readers. A well-studied case is that of the Black-capped Chick-a-dee tit. Its songs consist of discrete or digital units which I shall represent by capital letters. Four units, *A*, *B*, *C, D*, are repeated indefinitely but with certain constraints: *A* may be followed by *D*, and in that sequence, *AD*, both elements may be repeated indefinitely. The same holds for *BCD*, where *C* may be repeated indefinitely. We may find, for example, *AAAADDD* or *BCCCD*. But we never find *DCA.* There are several underlying rules which we can state more precisely when we take more details into account.

The same holds for language and mantras. In language, a *different* beginning may be followed by an *identical* end. For example, *Maya was eager to go to the concert* and *all her disciples were eager to go to the concert*. Conversely, the beginnings may be the same and the ends different: *Maya was eager to go to the dinner* and *Maya was eager to go to the concert*. What we do not find is the opposite one, i.e. *\*dinner Maya was eager to go to the*. A borderline case may depend on emphasis in context: *She detested cocktails but to the dinner Maya was eager to go.*

The same holds for mantras but in a different manner. It may lead to confusions or mistakes as T.P. Mahadevan and I encountered during the Morning Litany of a Soma ritual performed in 2003. The difficulty is due to the fact that 356 mantras from all over the Rigveda are recited but in a different order from the one in which they had been studied first and continue to be recited on other occasions.

What happened is that RV 5.79.1, the 218th mantra in the sequence, begins with *mahe no adya bodhaya*. Another mantra in the Rigveda, 7.75.2, begins with *mahe no adya* but then continues: *suvitāya bodhi*. It is very confusing not only because *bodh*-occurs in both mantras, but also because RV 7.75.2 does not occur in the Morning Litany at all though each of the poems 7.73, 7.74, 7.77, 7.78,7.79, 7.80 and 7.81 are recited there, almost as if a trap was planned. The reciter of the Litany fell into it but not the young assistant, sitting at his side.

The lapse implies that ‘mindless’ recitations of colossal amounts of mantras are not a mindless matter. It contributes, moreover, to the ‘picking up’ of mantras by youngsters during performances of Vedic rituals, which though similar to the picking up of language, occurs much more rarely.

But that is not the end of the story for the error that was made is different in structure from replacing *Maya was eager to go to the dinner* by *Maya was eager to go to the concert*. In order to explain this we have to look deeper which we shall do at the end of the next section on the Gāyatrī mantra. We should keep in mind that, whatever the similarities between mantras and bird song, we do not descend from birds. What does that imply? That the causes for the similarities in structure lie deeper. About mantras we still know little. As for recursiveness, there are different kinds and natural language, birds, mantras and ritual reveal instructive similarities and differences.

We can say one thing about the power of mantras. It pertains to those who possess them. Mantras strengthen memory and breath. The remaining questions about mantras are about the activity they accompany: do they strengthen it in some sense or other? Can they replace it as the mental or *mānasa* cup replaces a cup made of clay? We raised such questions in Chapter 8 in connection with the Atharvavedic mantras that accompany surgery. I have *ad hoc* ramblings but no general answer. But that is not very different from the results the study of bird song had reached about a decade ago when Catchpole and Slater \(1995\) described the state of the art: the diversity is so great, that it ‘defies explanation’ and we are left ‘to puzzle over the resulting richness and variety that evolution has created’.


