+++
title = "03 The Scientific Study of the Veda"

+++

In the last two chapters, we have looked at two controversies between Euro-American scholars about the Vedas. One is concerned with Vedic society, the other with the Soma. Both might seem to illustrate the irrelevance of infighting between Americans, Britons, Dutch- and Frenchmen to our august topic. But those inclined to think so would miss the point. The differences of opinion rest at least in part on categories that transcend contemporary national or political boundaries and are universal features of knowledge. Dumézil exhibits not nationalism but rationalism, Wasson combines rationalism with empiricism in another discipline, Gonda empiricism, and Brough comes closest to combining both. Of course, a good rationalist respects the facts and a good empiricist respects logic, otherwise they would not be scientists or thinkers—in any civilization.

If the rationalist Nyāya system of logic and the empiricist Vaiśeṣika—before they combined into the Nyāya–Vaiśeṣika—had paid more attention to the Vedas, they would have defended similarly different positions as Dumézil, Wasson, Gonda and Brough. The one philosophical system that is concerned with the Veda and to which I have already referred for that reason, the Mimāṃsā, combines rationalism and empiricism. Its theory of *apūrva*, offered as a causal explanation for the mechanism of karma, is rational. Its attention to Vedic *minutiae* is empirical. Although the data of the Mimāṃsā pertain exclusively to ritual, based as they are on the Śrauta Sūtras, they are concerned with facts. The Mimāṃsā may have little to say about history, but it has evolved an original theory about the facts of Vedic syntax.

Indian sciences pay attention to Vedic facts as Chapter 14 will demonstrate. The small number of Pāṇini’s rules that apply to the Vedic language are marked by the expression *chandasi*, ‘in the Veda’. They are far from exhaustive, and if omitted would not affect the system. I include Pāṇini in our discussion, though he does not belong to the Vedic period, because he would not have existed without it and adds fuel to my final observation: each of my few examples of rational and empirical approaches help to demonstrate that the Vedas have always been the subject of serious study. They are worthy of it and I hope they will remain so, that scholars and scientists will continue to pay attention to the facts, as we know them, and to rational argument in order to make sense. In these respects, the scientific study of the Rigveda and the other Vedas proceeds like any other science. We must know what the composers had in mind before we invoke the Vedas in support of a pet theory or deep conviction.

The present chapter has been concerned with some of the characteristics, including composers, subdivisions, metres and accents, invocations of gods and speculative poems of the Rigveda. I have discussed different points of view on the identity of the Soma plant and try to adjudicate between them. Has it been ‘a scientific study’ as I advocated just now? It is not because that would take more time. If we combine it with our earlier discussions pertaining to the Rigveda in Chapters 1 to 4, it may be looked upon as an introductory exploration.



