+++
title = "Funeral verses."

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

Book XVIII.

⌊**Funeral verses.**⌋

⌊Funeral ceremonies.—This eighteenth book is the sixth and last book of
the third grand division (books xiii.–xviii.) of the Atharvan
collection, and shows very clearly that general unity of subject which
is the distinguishing characteristic of the books of that division. In
particular, however, the verses of the book do not show an orderliness
of arrangement corresponding with that unity of subject. In large part,
the verses of this book appear also in the Rigveda and in book vi. of
the Tāittirīya Āraṇyaka, and the readings of these two texts are wont to
agree together rather than with those of the Atharvaveda. As appears
from the excerpts below, p. 814, the *Pañcapaṭalikā* seems to have a
special name for this book, 'The Yamas' or 'Yama-hymns.' The book has
been translated by Weber in the *Sitzungsberichte der königlich
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin* (cited below as
"*Sb*.") for 1895 and 1896. The *bhāṣya* is not wanting.⌋

  

The funeral ceremonies of the ancient Hindus (like their nuptial
ceremonies—see p. 738) have been often treated: thus, as early as 1801,
by Colebrooke, in vol. vii. of the *Asiatic Researches* (the paper is
reprinted by Cowell in his edition of H. T. Colebrooke's *Essays*, vol.
i.: see pages 172-206); by H. H. Wilson, *Works*, ii. 270 f.; by R.
Roth, ZDMG. viii. 467-475; by Max Müller, ZDMG. ix., appendix, pages
i-lxxxii; by Monier-Williams in his *Religious Thought and Life in
India*, chapter xi.; and by H. Oldenberg, *Religion des Veda*, pages
570-591. Closely akin in subject is Whitney's essay on *The Vedic
doctrine of a future life*, reprinted in his *Oriental and Linguistic
Studies*, i. 46-63.—See also my notes upon the customs and ritual of
cremation and burial (AGS. iv. 1-6) in my *Sanskrit Reader*, pages
401-405, and my notes on RV. x. 18 etc., *Reader*, pages 382-386: in
both places I have given many pertinent bibliographical references.—The
sixth *prapāṭhaka* of the Tāittiriya Āraṇyaka is devoted to the funeral
rites, and contains much of the material of this book of the AV.
Rājendralāla Mitra's analysis of the *prapāṭhaka* (pages 41-48 of the
"Contents" prefixed to his text-edition) may well be consulted, and also
pages 33-58 of his Introduction.—The most comprehensive treatment of the
subject has been given by Dr. W. Caland, under the title *Die
Altindischen Todten- und Bestattungsgebräuche mit Benutzung
handschriftlicher Quellen dargestellt*, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke
Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Deel 1.
N° 6, Amsterdam, 1896, pages xiv + 193.⌋

⌊Hymns (or *anuvākas*) 1 and 2 are treated by Weber (as above) in the
*Sitzungsberichte* for 1895, pages 815-866; and hymns (or *anuvākas*) 3
and 4, in the *Sitzungsberichte* for 1896, pages 253-294.—Weber's essays
give first a general introduction for the whole book (*Sb.*, 1895,
pages 815-819); and then, for each *anuvāka*, a special introduction
followed by a translation with running comment. Each special
introduction treats of the ritual uses of the *anuvāka* concerned and of
the provenience of the various verses or groups of verses which enter
into its composition and also of some general matters relating to that
*anuvāka*.⌋

⌊**Divisions of the book.**—The material of this book is divided by our
text into 4 *anuvākas* and this division coincides with the division
into 4 hymns. (Compare the *anuvāka*-division of books xii. and xiii.
and xiv.) A conspectus for book xviii. follows:

|                |             |        |             |            |
|----------------|-------------|--------|-------------|------------|
| Anuvākas       | 1           | 2      | 3           | 4          |
| Hymns          | 1           | 2      | 3           | 4          |
| Verses         | 61          | 60     | 73          | 89         |
| Decad-division | 5 tens + 11 | 6 tens | 6 tens + 13 | 8 tens + 9 |

Of the "decads," *anuvākas* 1, 2, 3, and 4 contain respectively 6, 6, 7,
and 9. The sum is 28 "decad"-*sūktas*. These 4 *anuvākas* and 28
*sūktas* are recognized by the Major Anukr., as noted below, next ¶. The
sum of verses is 283, as is also stated by the same treatise, if we
disregard an apparent misreading, ibidem.⌋

⌊**The Major Anukr.** begins its treatment of the book thus: *o cit
sakhāyam* (xviii. 1. 1) *iti caturanuvākam aṣṭāviṅśatisūktakaṁ
tryaśītidviśatanavatyarcaṁ* (? read *-dviśatarcam*) *yamadevatyaṁ
trāiṣṭubhaṁ kāṇḍam atharvā mantroktabahudevatyaṁ ca.*⌋

⌊That is to say: 'The book that begins with *o cit sakhāyam* has four
*anuvākas* and twenty-eight *sūktas* and two-hundred-and-eighty-three
verses and is in *triṣṭubh* meter; the seer is Atharvan; and the deities
are Yama and many others mentioned in its *mantras.*'⌋

⌊**The Pañcapaṭalikā.**—The excerpts from the Old Anukr. are given
piecemeal at the end of each *anuvāka* and may here be reconstructed
into a metrical couplet:

*ekaṣaṣṭiś ca ṣaṣṭiś ca saptatis tryadhikā paraḥ:*  
*ekonanavatiś cāi ’va yameṣu vihitā ṛcaḥ.*

That is to say: 'Sixty-one; and sixty; the next \[*anuvāka*\]
three-over-seventy; and ninety-less-one: are the verses disposed among
the Yama-hymns.' These excerpts are quoted in part and verbatim by the
Major Anukr.⌋

⌊It would thus appear from the Old Anukr. that the division into
*anuvākas* is indeed of considerable antiquity. On the other hand, we
cannot claim much intrinsic significance for the coincident division
into hymns: at all events, the fact that a ritual sequence runs over the
division-line between hymns 1 and 2 (see my note to 1. 49) makes against
such significance; and my suggestion (p. 848) as to a possible
misdivision between hymns 3 and 4 points the same way.⌋

⌊See p. clx, near end.⌋

  
The whole book is wanting in Pāipp., although a very few of the verses
(namely, 1. 46; 2. 13, 17; 3. 56; 4. 49) are found here and there in its
text. In the Vāit, which has no chapter devoted to funeral rites, only
fifteen scattered passages ⌊covering about a score of verses⌋ are used;
but in the Kāuś., most of the verses from 1. 40 on to the end of the
book are quoted, solely in the chapter (*adhyāya* xi.: sections or
*kanḍikās* 80-89) which deals with funeral rites and rites to the
Fathers or Manes. ⌊See p. 1016.⌋
</details>
