+++
title = "01 Towards Universality"

+++

It is often maintained that progress is a Western notion. But the term ‘Western’ is as misleading as ‘Eastern’ or ‘Oriental’. I discovered this in California when I noted that Japan was not in the east but in the west. All such terms are subjective: they throw no light on the locality of the user and provide no information about the locality of the place to which they refer. Unlike ‘Western,’ *progress* says something about what happens or does not happen in the world. The Vedas do not mention progress, but did not regard themselves as ‘eternal’ or ‘of non-human origin’ \(*apauru*ṣ*eya*\), ideas that originated in the post-Vedic philosophy of the Mīmāṃsā. They depict their human composers, tell us stories about their eventful lives and describe developments that take place around them. It is I who is asking: did they make progress within that long Vedic period which lasted from ca. 1700 to 450 BCE?

The Rigveda starts from the smallest social unit, the family. It exhibits everything that is clannish: tightly-knit links, atavistic beliefs, close and exclusive attachments to the tribe, to local poets and leaders. All seek wealth, success, long lives and sons. In the later Rigveda there emerge great speculative poems. They are almost contemporary with the earliest Upaniṣads which, though secret by definition, became most widely known. In that development, the Sāmaveda remained mysterious and the Yajurveda played a conservative role. But the breakdown of the schools and the emergence of the classical Upaniṣads depict the movement of a civilization towards universality.

That universality is incompatible with a narrowing religious outlook. That is one of the reasons I have stressed from the beginning that the Vedas are not a religion. They are a civilization.

A narrowing religious outlook and intolerance are two sides of the same coin. Examples abound. At the time of writing, Pope Benedict XVI declared: ‘Catholic faith obliges us to hold that souls are immediately created by God.’ It is implied that soul means: human soul, i.e. humans have souls, but animals do not. Composers of the Vedas also had wide-ranging opinions. But they never doubted that there is a gradual transition from animal to human. It is in accordance with the mounting evidence from evolutionary biology. Those who close their eyes to that evidence live in a dream.

The phrase ‘narrowing religious outlook’ comes from Jawaharlal Nehru. He may or may not have been thinking of Rigvedic poetry when he wrote about the Upaniṣads: ‘We cannot go back to that old pantheistic outlook, and yet perhaps we may still sense the mystery of nature, listen to her song of life and beauty, and draw vitality from her.’ Nehru’s lament was perhaps in part an expression of the longing of a great statesman for his native Kashmir. He then went further: ‘We have to get rid of that narrowing religious outlook, that obsession with the supernatural and metaphysical speculations, that loosening of the mind’s discipline in religious ceremonial and mystical emotionalism, which comes in the way of our understanding ourselves and the world.’ That description applies to post-Vedic Upaniṣads and religions when the meaning of *veda* as knowledge was simply forgotten.

The notion of intolerance is not applicable to mantras or ritual. Stobhas such as *ī*ḍ*ā* and *ilā* belong to different schools, but that has nothing to do with dichotomies such as true/false or right/wrong. Even Baudhāyana holds the left palm up and the right palm down on a bundle of grass during the *nihnava* ceremony, because he is a Taittirīyaka Yajurvedin, whereas a Kauṣītaki Rigvedin does it the other way round during the same ceremony. The actual differences are as minuscule and insignificant as the differences between religious sects; but reciters of mantras, chanters of songs or ritualists do not kill each other.

The simple and simplistic observations that I have offered in this section on the Vedic way toward universality are not idle observations on a topic that belongs to a distant past. They take us right to the present. Dreams of paradise are no longer harmless; they have turned into violence. Looking in all directions, we must unite, save life and protect our poor Gaia in so far as it can still be done. Vedic nomads destroyed many forests but the Vedas are on our side.


