+++
title = "02 The Powers of Language"

+++

We have seen that the greatest contributions of the Indian sciences were in the understanding of language. To grasp their origins, we have to go back further than the Prātiśākhyas, the Padapāṭha and the Sound Pattern of Language to the Rigveda where the earliest meaning of *bráhman* was ‘sublime language’. It is connected with one god, Bṛhaspati, and two goddesses, Vāc and Sarasvatī, barely touched upon in my account so far. I have not neglected the sounds of language or linguistics, but never tried to derive a general conclusion from all that is said with respect to these topics in the Veda.

‘Speech’ is the traditional translation and interpretation of *bráhman* as well as *vāc*. The correct translation is *language*. In modern usage, the two are clearly distinguished. Speech is what we say; it is a manifestation of language which is an innate faculty of the mind. In Indian studies it is often said and written that ‘speech’ is regarded as a transcendental power in the Vedas and Vedānta, Mīmāṃsā, Sāṃkhya-Yoga, the philosophy of grammar and Kashmir Śaivism; but as conventional and arbitrary in the Cārvāka and in early Buddhism. The Vedas, however, do not call *vāc* ‘transcendental’ \(*paramārtha*\). They regard it as the direct manifestation of thought or mind \(*manas*\). That applies, to language but not to speech which is often mindless. We have already come across important uses of *manasā*, ‘with’ or ‘in the mind.’ The Vedic Indians imported chariots into the subcontinent *manasā* \(Chapter 2\). Sanskrit *manas* is etymologically related to English *mind.* That does not prove much, but helps to clear the jungle and ‘mind’ is relatively clear in modern usage.

The Rigveda devotes two hymns to *vāc*. One is ‘a paean of self-praise’ as Wendy Doniger calls it. The other, RV 10.71, begins with the verse:
>
> Bṛhaspati\! When they \(the first poets and seers\) set in motion the first beginning of language \(*vāc*\), setting up names, what had been hidden in them as their best and purest good became manifest through love.

> Where the sages fashioned language with their thought \(*vāc manasā*\), filtering it like parched grain through a sieve, friends recognized their friendships. Their beauty was marked on the language.

We should make a correction in the first verse, not an emendation but a reminder. Language does not consist of names. It is an old error, found across the globe. The ancient Chinese, Greeks and Hebrews accepted it as did the Vedas as we see here—though not without serious qualification. Perhaps the phrase ‘setting up names’ \(*nāmadheya*ṃ *dadhānā*ḥ\) escaped from the heart of the poet involuntarily, like a seed that falls from a blossom and is carried through the wind until it settles down somewhere.

Why does language not consist of names and why is ‘naming’ not the first step of language? Because names are only a subclass of words and words are only a small part of language which consists of sentences, syntax, semantics, grammar and is linked with thought—*vāc manasā*—as the second verse says. All these things were known throughout the Vedic period and brought to perfection by the Sanskrit grammarians and all the Indic linguists that followed—touched upon in Chapters 11, 12 and 14.

In the second verse, the phrase ‘filtering it like parched grain through a sieve’ evokes the filtering of the Soma beverage.

The Rigveda links language not only to ‘thought’ but also to ‘vision’ \(*dh*ī\), a word from which comes *dhyāna*, ‘meditation’ in one of its later meanings. Like *vāc manasā,* ‘language from thought’, *manasā dhī,* ‘vision from thought’, is a common expression. Elsewhere the inspiration of the poets is expressed by *vip*, related to English ‘vibration’, which evokes the shaman who trembles under the influence of his or her vision. Since language originates from thought, vision, love, the heart and the self, its understanding is difficult, says the Rigveda; therefore: ‘he who studies understands, not the one who sleeps.’

Fascination with *vāc* did not stop with the Rigveda for its powers are great. In the Chāndogya Upaniṣad, Uddālaka discusses cause and effect, like when clay is transformed into a pot. He says: ‘the effect is *vāc-ārambhanam*’ which means: ‘it originates from language.’ This is not correct in the case of the pot, which is different from clay also in shape, as later Indic philosophers observed; but it is true in other cases, for example in *speech acts*, where the appropriate authority who pronounces the words: ‘I unite you in marriage’ has not merely said something. He has caused two people to be married to each other as we have seen in Chapter 11.

The powers of language enable us not only to communicate with each other, but to talk about the world and express our feelings and ideas. Our languages divide us but enable us at the same time to go into great detail about an infinite number of topics. In that respect human language is more powerful than the systems of communication used by non-human animals though the transitions—very controversial for the time being—are likely to be gradual. It is a large topic upon which we have touched in Chapters 11 and 12.

The powers of language are a favourite topic of philosophers but only those who have a specialized knowledge of the topic seem to have been able to arrive at valuable insights. According to Bhartṛhari \(fifth century CE\), a philosopher as well as a linguist, there is no knowledge without language. Earlier he made a different observation: language is no guarantee of truth, it is an imagined construction of being, ‘a mismatch for reality’ as Saroja Bhate expressed it. It follows that reality cannot be understood by using ordinary language. Bhartṛhari sought clarification in a Vedic scheme of four levels of language that had a great future in Indic speculation. I shall discuss it in the next section, but one thing is clear. Seers come at the top, what humans speak comes at the bottom.

I am sure that similar ideas have been expressed by poets, thinkers, mystics and writers in other civilizations. What distinguishes the development that started in the Vedas from others is its close association with the sciences of language. It has empirical foundations. I am familiar with two more recent scientists whose insights were not only similarly profound, but equally well informed about language. One is Wilhelm von Humboldt \(1767–1835\), whose numerous works include three volumes on the language of Java. Especially famous and influential, and often obscure, is its 300-page *Introduction* entitled ‘The Diversity of Human Language-Structure and its Influence on the Mental Development of Mankind’. The other is Roman Jakobson \(1896–1982\), who was equally prolific and combined not only a professorship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology \(MIT\) with one at Harvard University, but linguistics, literature, poetics, semantics and Slavic studies—all topics on which he expressed himself not only forcefully but with great clarity. The insights of these two giants display the same breadth and depth as the Vedic and it is clear that the latter will play an increasingly important role in any future science and philosophy of language.


