+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
[^p. 425]

## 01
1 [^1-18]. When undertaking ceremonies for the obtainment of special wishes, let him omit six meals or three.

[^1-18]: IV, 1, 1-18 = Gobhila IV, 5, I, 9, 10, 11, 13, 12, 27, 24, 25, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 27, 28, 22, 23, 30-34 (9 deest).

## 02
2. At such ceremonies as are repeated daily, (let him do so only) in the beginning;

## 03
3. After (the ceremony), if it is performed on account of a prodigy.

## 04
4. Thus also at the performances of the sacrificial day (i.e. of the first day of the fortnight).

## 05
5. One who keeps the vow (of fasting) through one fortnight, (may avail himself of the following indulgence):

## 06
6. If he is not able (to subsist entirely without food, let him drink) rice-water once a day.

## 07
7. Let him murmur the Prapada formula (MB. II, 4, 5), sitting in the forest on eastward-pointed grass-blades.

## 08
8. Thus one who is desirous of holy lustre.

## 09
9. One who is desirous of cattle, as stated above (III, I, 5?).

## 10
10. One who desires that his stock of cattle

[^p. 426]

may increase, should sacrifice rice and barley, with (the verse), 'He who has a thousand arms' (MB. II, 4, 7).

## 11
11. To one with whom he wishes to become associated, he should give fruits of a big tree, over which he has murmured the Kautomata verse (MB. II, 4, 8).

## 12
12. Having kept the vow (of fasting) through one fortnight, he should in the full-moon night plunge up to his navel into a pool which does not dry up, and should sacrifice with his mouth fried grain into the water, with the five (verses), 'Like a tree' (MB. II, 4, 9-13).

## 13
13. This ceremony procures (property on) the earth.

## 14
14. One who is desirous of the enjoyment (of riches), should worship the sun with the first (of those five verses), while one who is rich in wealth should look at him.

## 15
15. One who desires that his stock of horses and elephants may increase, (should sacrifice) fried grain with the second (of those verses), while the sun has a halo.

## 16
16. One who desires that his flocks may increase, (should sacrifice) sesamum seeds with the third (verse), while the moon has a halo.

[^p. 427]

## 17
17. Having worshipped the sun with the fourth (verse), let him try to gain great wealth.

## 18
18. Having worshipped the sun with the fifth, let him return home.

## 19 
19 [^19-27]. In order to avert involuntary death let him murmur every day (the formula), 'Bhû!' (MB. II, 4, 14.)

[^19-27]: 19-27 = IV, 6, 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 3, 10-12 (22 deest).

## 20
20. On the sacrificial day (i.e. the first day of the fortnight) let him make oblations with the six verses, From the head' (MB. II, 5, 1 seqq.), with the Vâmadevya verses, with the Mahâvyâhtis, and with the verse sacred to Praâpati (l.l. 8).

## 21
21. Thus he will drive away misfortune.

## 22
22. On an unsafe road let him murmur the verse, 'Go away' (Rig-veda X, 164, 1).

## 23
23. One who is desirous of glory should worship the sun in the forenoon, at noon, and in the afternoon, with (the formula), 'I am glory' (MB. II, 5, 9).

## 24
24. Let him change (the word), 'Of the forenoon,' according (to the different times of the day).

## 25
25. Worshipping (the sun) at twilight with the formula, 'O sun! the ship' (MB. II, 5, 14), procures happiness.

## 26
26. At the morning twilight (he says), 'When thou risest' (l.l. 15).

[^p. 428]

## 27
27. At the evening twilight, 'When thou goest to rest' (l.l. 16).

