+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1-5]. Having kept the vow (of fasting) through one fortnight, he should, on the first day of the dark fortnight, feed the Brâhmaas with boiled milk-rice prepared of one Kasa of rice.

[^1-5]: 2, 1-5 = Gobhila IV, 6, 13-16.

## 02
2. The small grains of that (rice) he should sacrifice (day by day) at the evening twilight to the west of the village, on a place which he has besmeared (with cowdung), with the formula, 'To Phala' (MB. II, 5, 17).

## 03
3. And with (the formula), 'To Phalla!' The same on the first day of the next dark fortnight.

## 04
4. He shall observe chastity till the end (of the rite).

## 05
5. A hundred cart-loads (of gold) will be his.

## 6 
6 [^6-23]. A Brâhmaa should elect the site for building his house on white ground, a Kshatriya on red, a Vaiya on black, which should be even, covered with grass, not salinous, not dry - 

[^6-23]: 6-23 = IV, 7.

## 07
7. Where the water flows off to the north-west.

## 08
8. (Plants) with milky juice or with thorns or acrid plants should not be there.

[^p. 429]

## 09
9. (Soil) on which Darbha-grass grows, brings holy lustre;

## 10
10. Big sorts of grass, strength;

## 11
11. Tender grass, cattle.

## 12
12. Or (the site of the house) should have the form of bricks (?) or of . . . . . . . (?)

## 13
13. Or there should be natural holes (in the ground) in all directions.

## 14,
14, 15. (A house) with its door to the east brings wealth and fame; with its door to the north, children and cattle. By one with its door to the south all wishes (are obtained). The back-door should not face (?) the house-door.

## 16
16. Milk-rice should be offered,

## 17
17. And a black cow,

## 18
18. Or a white goat. Or only milk-rice.

## 19
19. In the middle of the house he should sacrifice the fat (of the animal) and the milk-rice, mixed with Âya, taking eight portions (of that mixture), with (the verse), 'Vâstoshpati!' (MB. II, 6, I.)

## 20
20. And with the seven last (texts) used at the driving away of misfortune (see above, chap. I, 20, 21).

## 21
21. After he has sacrificed, he should distribute Balis in the different directions (of the horizon).

[^p. 430]

## 22
22. And towards the intermediate points, and upwards and downwards.

## 23
23. This (he should repeat) every year, or at the two sacrifices of the first-fruits (of rice and barley).

## 24 
24 [^24]. With the two (formulas), 'Obeying the will' (MB. II, 6, 7, 8), he should sacrifice two oblations.

[^24]: 24 = IV, 8, 7 (25 deest).

## 25
25. He should pronounce the name of the person whom he wishes to subdue to his will, 'N.N.;' then that person will obey him.

