+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1-5]. Keeping the observance (of fasting) through one fortnight, let him sacrifice in a full-moon night one hundred pegs with the Ekâksharyâ verse (MB. II, 6, 9), if he is desirous of having (a large) family.

[^1-5]: 3, 1-5, Gobhila IV, 8, 10-16. 6 = IV, 9, 15.

## 02
2. (Those pegs should be) of Khâdira wood, if he is desirous of long life.

## 03
3. Now another (ceremony performed with the same verse). He should go out of the village in an eastern or northern direction, should brush up an elevated surface, or (should raise it) on a mountain with the dung of beasts of the forest, should set it on

[^p. 431]

fire, should sweep the coals away (from that surface), and should make an oblation (of butter) with his mouth.

## 04
4. If (the butter) catches fire, twelve villages (will be his).

## 05
5. If smoke rises, at least three.

## 06
6. Let him sacrifice in the evening and in the morning the fallings-off of rice-grains. Thus his means of livelihood will not be exhausted.

## 7 
7 [^7-9]. Of articles of trade let him make an oblation with (the formula), 'Here (this Vivakarman),' (MB. II, 6, 10.)

[^7-9]: 7-9 = IV, 8, 19 seqq.

## 08
8. On the sacrificial day (i.e. on the first day of the fortnight) let him sacrifice a full oblation (with the verse MB. II, 6, II, 'A full oblation I sacrifice,' &c.).

## 09
9. One who is desirous of companions (should sacrifice) with (the formula), 'Indrâmavadât' (?), (MB. II, 6, 12.)

## 10 
10 [^10-16]. He should fast through a period of eight nights, and then should kindle a fire to the east or to the north of the village, at a place where four roads meet. The fuel should be Udumbara wood, and the Sruva and the cup (for water should be of the same wood). Let him sacrifice (Âya) with (the formulas), 'Food indeed,' and 'Bliss indeed' (MB. II, 6, 13, 14).

[^10-16]: 10-16 = IV, 9, 1 seqq.

## 11
11. A third (oblation) in the village with (the formula), 'The food’s' (l.l. 15).

[^p. 432]

## 12
12. Then he will become a ruler.

## 13
13. When (his cows) are sick, let him sacrifice milk-rice in the cow-stable.

## 14
14. On a dangerous road let him make knots in the skirts of the garments (of those who travel together). This will bring a prosperous journey to (himself) and his companions.

## 15
15. With the two (formulas), 'To Hunger Svâhâ!' (MB. II, 6, 16, 17), let him sacrifice a thousand oblations, if he desires to obtain a thousand cart-loads (of gold).

## 16
16. One who is desirous of cattle (should sacrifice one thousand oblations) of the excrements of a male and a female calf. Of a male and a female sheep, if he is desirous of flocks.

## 17 
17 [^17]. Let him make oblations of fresh cowdung in the evening and in the morning; then his means of livelihood will not be exhausted.

[^17]: 17 = IV, 8, 18.

