+++
title = "paryāya-hymns"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

Book VIII.

⌊The second grand division of the Atharvan collection comprehends books
viii.-xii. It consists wholly of hymns of more than twenty verses, and
contains all the hymns of that length except such as for especial
reasons were placed in the later books. Leaving out of account the later
books, there are forty-five such hymns; and these have been divided into
five books, of which the first four, books viii., ix., x., and xi., have
ten hymns each, while the remaining five hymns make up the twelfth book.
Disregarding ix. 6 and xi. 3 (*paryāya*-hymns), it may be noted that
books viii.-xi. contain all the hymns of from twenty to fifty verses to
be found in the first two grand divisions, and that book xii. contains
all of more than that number in the same divisions. "Of any other
principle of arrangement dependent on the length of the different hymns,
no trace is to be observed," says Whitney. For the divisions of book
viii., see below. The whole book has been translated by Victor Henry,
*Les livres VIII et IX de l'Atharva-véda traduits et commentés*, Paris,
1894. The commentary ("of Sāyaṇa") breaks off at the end of hymn 6 and
we have no more of it till the beginning of book xi. But in lieu of the
missing introductions, Shankar Pandurang Pandit gives introductions of
his own, modelled on those of the *bhāṣya*, and drawn from the same
sources, the Kāuśika, the Keśavī, etc.⌋

⌊The Major Anukramaṇī, at the beginning of §2 of its treatment of book
viii., says that, 'up to the end of book xi., the *artha-sūktas*
constitute the norm and the *paryāyas*, beginning with *virāḍ vā* (viii.
10. 1), the exception': *yāvad ekādaśakāṇḍāntam arthasūkta-prakṛtis,
tāvad vihāya paryāyān virāḍvā-prabhṛtīn iti*. And in fact, all through
books viii.-xii., and even to the end of book xviii., every *arthasūkta*
is by one ms. or another designated as an *arthasūkta* (xviii. 2 is an
exception, solitary and doubtless casual).—In this place it may be well
to enumerate the *paryāya*-hymns (including those also of the next
division) and to print an account of the way in which the mss. present
them. The account (barring slight changes) is by Mr. Whitney, and is
Written on a loose slip of paper found in his Collation-book at viii.
10. 1.⌋

⌊The **paryāya-hymns** are eight in number and are scattered over seven
different books. Specifically, and with the number of *paryāyas* in
each, they are as follows: viii. 10 (with 6 *paryāyas*); ix. 6 (with 6);
ix. 7 (with 1); xi. 3 (with 3); xii. 5 (with 7); xiii. 4 (with 6); book
xv. (18 *paryāyas*); book xvi. (9 *paryāyas*).⌋



They are called *paryāya-sūktas* in distinction from those among which
they occur and which are named *artha-sūktas*. The separate portions of
which they are composed are called each a *paryāya* ⌊or also
*paryāya-sūkta*⌋. Each ⌊*paryāya* taken separately⌋ is in the mss.
numbered as to its verses separately; but they ⌊the *paryāyas* of a
given group taken together⌋ so evidently constitute each a whole, as
shown by the sense and likewise by the manner in which the Anukramaṇīs
treat them, that we ⌊R. and W.⌋ regarded it as beyond question that they
should be numbered continuously, to save a citation by more than three
numbers. ⌊In this connection should be consulted SPP's "Critical
Notice," prefixed to vol. i., p. 19 ff.⌋

⌊See pages cxxxiii-vii.⌋

⌊Each *paryāya* has its own summing up at the end: if a numbered
division corresponding to an *ṛc* is composed of more than one divided
portion, it is called a *gaṇa*, and its subdivisions *avasāna-rcas* or
*gaṇā ’vasāna-rcas*. Thus the first division of viii. 10.⌋ is summed up
as follows: *paryāyaḥ 1, gaṇāḥ 6, gaṇāvasānarcaḥ* 13; and it is by the
latter number that the Anukr. treats it. Similarly the third *paryāya*
of viii. 10⌋ is summed up as *paryāya-sūktam* 1, *gaṇāḥ* 4,
*gaṇāvasānarcaḥ* 8. ⌊Cf. the summation at the end of viii. 10.⌋

In xii. 5 the divisions are called *vacanāni* or *vacanā ’vasāna-rcas*.
In *paryāyas* 5 and 6 of xiii. 4 a distinction is made between
*avasānarcaḥ* and *gaṇāvasānarcaḥ*, those which have the refrain
receiving the latter designation.

The divisions of books xv. and xvi. are likewise *paryāyas*, and their
subdivisions are styled *avasānarcaḥ* or *ganāvasānarcaḥ* in the same
manner.

⌊The *anuvāka*-division of each of the ten-hymned books viii.-xi. is
into five *anuvākas* of two hymns each; and that of book xii.
(consisting of five long hymns) is also into five *anuvākas*, but these
are of one hymn each, so that here the *anuvāka*-dison and the
hymn-division coincide. The comm. divides the *anuvākas* into hymns in a
manner nearly like that described for book vii. (see p. 3S8): that is,
his "hymns" are mechanical decads of verses, with an overplus or
shortage in the last "decad" when the total for the hymn (not—as in book
vii.—for the *anuvāka*) is not an exact multiple of ten. A tabular
conspectus for book viii. follows:

[TABLE]

Here ¶ means "paragraph of a *paryāya*" (such as is numbered as a
"verse" in the Berlin edition) and P means "*paryāya*." The last line
shows the "decad"-division. These divisions are shown also in the Berlin
edition. Of these "decads," *anuvākas* 1, 2, 3, and 4 contain
respectively 5, 6, 5, and 5 (in all, 21 "decads"); while *anuvāka* 5 has
3 "decads" and 6 *paryāyas*. The sum is 24 "decad"-sūktas and 6
*paryāya-sūktas* or 30 *sūktas*. Cf. again the summation at the end of
hymn 10.⌋
</details>
