+++
title = "01 Villages, Forests and the Ecology"

+++

In Chapter 1 I have referred to a hypothetical period of 9,000 years during which the indigenous lineages of the subcontinent of South Asia remained widespread in both tribal and caste populations. Whether it was actually 9,000 years or more or less is irrelevant from our Vedic point of view. Other facts are more significant in our present context: Chapter 3 showed that caste was assigned to the Vedas by a post-Vedic and caste-obsessed society. Sedentary villages, on the other hand, pre-dated the Vedas. One such village with a history of some 5,000 years is well-known: the Neolithic village of Mehrgarh \(Frontispiece, near 8\).

The civilization of the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas or ‘Forest Books’ is certainly sedentary but illustrates at the same time that *forest* continued to be contrasted with *village*. Chapter 6 showed that the Sāmaveda distinguished, probably at an earlier period, between songs sung in the village and the more powerful and secret chants that were reserved for the forest or wilderness. It supplemented Chapter 3 which had detailed the interesting history in Vedic of the modern term for village, *grāma*: its meanings ranged from ‘trains of herdsmen’ to its modern denotation. As for *ara*ṇ*ya*, it was a frightening place and replete with power: hence ‘wilderness’ as well as ‘forest’. Vedic has also an intermediate term, *vana,* which refers to ‘woods’ where villagers went to collect wood along with herbs and medicinal plants. The *ara*ṇ*ya*, forest and wilderness as well as desert, was further away. What we call cities and states \(*nagara*\) do not seem to have come into being before the early Upaniṣads, in the Ganges valley, sixth to fourth centuries BCE.

Speaking of forests, deforestation has always been around the corner. Deforestation by fire may have started soon after its discovery. Copper and bronze appeared in due course but it took a few thousand years for them to be replaced by iron, between 1,000 and 500 BCE. Now strong weapons and tools assisted fire in clearing forests north of the Ganges. A well-known story of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa depicts Agni setting a path of flames going from west to east. He could not cross the Sadānīrā \(*nīra*, a word for river from Dravidian\) which is now called Gaṇḍak \(a Munda word, like perhaps Gaṇgā itself\), and the other side \(Videha, Sanskrit ‘without body’\) was regarded as inferior and uncultivated though it is likely that flourishing cultures existed. Not long thereafter, Vedas were composed there, including the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa itself. All these transitions were accompanied by conceptual changes. The Śatapatha exists in two versions as the Table of *Four: The Four Vedas* showed. ‘Breath’ \(*prā*ṇ*a*\), still preponderant in the Mādhyaṇdina recension, is replaced by *brahma* in the other, the Kāṇva recension.

New ideas appear when people cross mountains and rivers, meet others and begin to settle down.


