+++
title = "02 Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas"

+++

We have seen that the term *Brāhma*ṇ*a* is used in several senses. The meaning with which we are concerned in this chapter is one of them: a Vedic composition in prose. In the Yajurveda, that composition is mainly concerned with interpretations of mantras in ritual terms. In the Rig-, Sāma- and Atharva-Vedas, a Brāhmaṇa is more like a separate unit—what we have in mind when we think of a ‘book’. But all these compositions continue to be oral and orally transmitted, sometimes with the old accents. To be a composer one now had to be not only a ritual expert, preferably a priest, but also a scholar, familiar with the tradition. No wonder that such people were called *Brāhma*ṇ*a*. They were no longer sages, they were specialists who composed Brāhmaṇas or pieces thereof, and liked to be the advisers of rulers or chieftains. In all these capacities, being specialists did not prevent them from holding forth about anything that took their fancy. Like authors of successful books, they could count on an audience. They are in many respects like *authors*, only they did not write; but they expressed their opinions forcefully, putting themselves in their compositions, and they became *authorities*. That is what brahmins, as I may now call them, always remained, in India as elsewhere where we find them during the post-Vedic periods. Khmer, Javanese, Balinese, Thai and other brahmans remained ritual experts and advisors to rulers or chieftains.

In the Black Yajurveda, the Brāhmaṇas that these *brāhma*ṇ*a* authorities composed, were still relatively closely attached to the poetry, now called Mantra, which they interpreted in ritual terms. But what they say is meant or intended there, has often nothing to do with the Mantras they followed. We have already met with these Brāhmaṇas in Chapter 7 on the Yajurveda. I shall not repeat any of this here but *Seven: Yajurveda* would fit in the present chapter precisely at this spot.

The White Yajurveda, a reform movement, returned to the structure of the Rigveda: it consists in its entirety of verse. So does the Atharvaveda, and the Sāmaveda in a similar manner but here the verse are chants. Āraṇyakas which are ‘Forest’ or ‘Wilderness’ compositions are the final parts of Brāhmaṇas or attached to them in the Yajurveda. In the Rigveda they are transmitted as separate compositions.

If we look at Table 1 on pp. 80–81, these differences are expressed as follows. In the Rig-, Sāma-, Atharva- and White Yajurveda, Saṃhitā and Brāhmaṇa are distinct and have different names. In the Black Yajurveda, there is one continuous series of compositions that starts with sequences of Mantras and Brāhmaṇas and to which Āraṇyakas and even Upaniṣads are attached. Āraṇyakas occur in the White Yajurveda also but are attached to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. This includes the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upaniṣad which is an Āraṇyaka as its name says. The only other Āraṇyakas are listed under Rigveda where they belong.

So much for the forms. What about the contents? I have already alluded to the fact that almost anything may be put in a Brāhmaṇa. That applies to the Āraṇyakas as well. In the Yajurveda chapter, I heaped much adverse comment on both ‘literary’ genres—if that is what they are. Although both contain valuable information and insights, the modern student has to ferret them out. ‘Ferreting’ does not imply that we impose extraneous criteria on a composition that is constructed in accordance with a well-thought-out scheme; for that is not what the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas are. They are large depositories of interpretations, comments and observations that sometimes follow the order of ritual proceedings, elsewhere interrupt their course and shift to other rites or reflections on an almost unlimited range of topics. They are mixed or put together with etymologies, stories, speculations, and a great deal of what we may call magic but is better, more truthfully and less condescendingly or insultingly described as simple superstition. It is the kind of thing with which authorities can get away.

We need not accept ‘multiculturalism’, but should we not be charitable? We should be, but there is a limit even to charity. We do need to distinguish between valuable and valueless; without this nothing has any value and ‘discovering’ or ‘analysing’ is idle. From that point of view the two large Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda are the most attractive. Most suspect is the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, ‘Brāhmaṇa of the Hundred Paths’ of the White Yajurveda, a veritable encyclopedia of meandering opinions on ritual and other matters. A simple example is its discussion of the term *upā*ṃ*śu* in the sense of ‘indistinct’ \(rather than the more technical ‘articulate but inaudible’ to which we return in Chapter 15\). The Śatapatha regarded it as the appropriate form of invocation when addressing the ‘ineffable’ \(*anirukta*\) creator god Prajāpati, ‘Lord of Creatures’. The Brāhmaṇa declares that the indistinct is appropriate to Prajāpati ‘because the indistinct is the ineffable, the ineffable is the whole and Prajāpati is the whole world.’ Why does it not make sense? Because it is parallel to a declaration that is palpably absurd: ‘blue is green because everything is green and cheese is everything.’

The Śatapatha is one of the largest Brāhmaṇas, accessible through the five volumes of Eggeling’s translation into English that was published in the *Sacred Books of the East* between 1882 and 1897 and has been reprinted often. It continues to enjoy great popularity because of its availability and because it contains enough material to support *any* theory.

Eggeling must have spent a good part of his life translating the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. He speaks with authority, therefore, when he declares in the third sentence of his Introduction to the first volume:
>
> For wearisome prolixity of exposition, characterized by a flimsy symbolism rather than by serious reasoning, these works are perhaps not equalled anywhere; unless, indeed, it be by the speculative vapourings of the Gnostics …

The Gnostics were a variety of Christian and non-Christian teachings, written in Greek during the first centuries CE in the Near East.

Keith and other translators of the second half of the ninenteenth century and the beginning decades of the twentieth agree with these harsh judgements and so do I as the reader will have noted. Some Vedic scholars have subsequently tuned down the purple prose to a watery rose. Jan Gonda, author of roughly a hundred volumes on Vedic and related matters, has tried to place the facts in a wider context of an ethnography that is now rather dated, but without expressing similar feelings of distaste. Should we or should we not be charitable?

We should take our sources seriously, for to do otherwise is merely an insult to the composers. The difficulty is that they make no sense as a statement in language, whether it is Vedic or English. For a statement to make sense it must obey the minimum of logic that lies at the core of every human language. Children are at first unaware of it, but it is already part of their mental structure. They become conscious of and familiar with it when they pick up a language. If a mother says to her child, in any language: ‘blue is green because everything is green and cheese is everything,’ the child asks: ‘What do you mean, Mama?’

It is in that same spirit that we must ask the same question from the Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads.


