+++
title = "1 A Tumult of Veda and the Brahmacarin"

+++

Senior Konasima Veda pandits and others who were youngsters in the 1960s  recall the days when there was “a tumult of Veda” heard before dawn as freshly  bathed gurus and brahmacarin faced one another to immerse minds and voices  in ever-continuing lessons. Chapter 2 provided a brief overview of the trans 

mission of Veda from an older to a younger generation and the progression of  the student from his initial portion of the Taittiriya Samhita to his examination  and certification as a Veda pandit. Chapter 3 gave numerous examples of indi vidual development. There is more to be said of this evolution and the larger  

meaning of interiorizing Veda within the topography of Vedic pandit.1 The first question an outsider asks is, “What is ‘Veda’ for these  agrahara-based Vaidika Brahmans?” Their replies portray Veda as at once sym bol and symbol system. Veda appears to represent an alternate reality, Gaston  Bachelard’s univers imaginaire in the sense that it exists as the real world, a  whole world, as opposed to the illusory fragmentations of laukika, mundane,  existence.2 For the Veda pandit this is an accessible world and, once entered,  a usable world, for it is the mantra and kriya that make up reality and daily  negotiate its perpetuation. The dedicated Veda pandit speaks, as noted earlier,  of “existing in Veda.” At the same time, Veda is not in the least demystified  through such proximity and accessibility. Always it retains its properties of  mystery (guhya, rahasya). It abides in the realm of the numinous because it  is eternal, apauruseya, without human origin, a hierophany in simultaneity  inside and outside of time and space. No human can ever appropriate all of it,  not even the self-proclaimed catur-vedin who has become all four Vedas. All of  this speaks to the density of the text that has enabled the two-syllabled word  Veda to command priority of attention across several millennia of Vedic-Hindu  civilization.

142 vedic voices 

A second question an outsider might ask is, How does one “learn” Veda?  In the West, there is a particular educational model regarding knowledge: a  teacher who is a “knower” facilitates a student who does not know in a process  of turning the latter into the former. Perhaps, however, the term “education”  might be exchanged for “transmission.” What is the process of transmitting  this beginning-less oral phenomenon Veda to a living Vaidika Brahman? The  epistemological question follows: What does it mean to “know” Veda when the  word veda itself is “knowledge.” 

Brahmanical tradition includes a prized phrase, ya evam veda, “who knows  thus,” who knows the correspondences, equivalences, connections to unseen  realities. The boy already understands that the fire he tends corresponds to, is divine Agni, and in his morning and evening prayers he discerns an equiva lence of human breath with cosmic prana. He is beginning to “know” as his  dive into the Taittiriya Samhita deepens with constant cross-fertilizing associa tions regarding soma, the moon, altar bricks, enthronement of the fire pan,  and so forth. By the time he gets to the Taittiriya Upanisad and its famous  correspondence of self and cuisine in the great chain of being, aham annam,  “I am food,” he will have absorbed basic mysteries of correspondence and  equivalence (nidana, sampad, or bandhu). It is esoteric knowledge, gnosis, in  the sense that a precious few legatees of the ancient rsi carry these sacred man tras and their entourage of text. If he grows up in or near an ahitagni family he  will observe the application of these mantras in daily ritual life. Mantras, in the  apt definition of Frits Staal, are those “bits and pieces of the Vedas put to ritual  use,”3 and the boy will find daily illustrations all about him. 

The blueprint for the brahmacarin is straightforward. Transmission  begins on an auspicious day in the spring with the upanayana when a frail  boy of seven or eight years has his head shaved before his bath. Then he is  invested with a sacred three-stranded cord (upavita, or yajnopavita, sacrificial  thread) and hears from his guru his first mantra, the savitri, in the gayatri 

meter. So significant is this moment that it constitutes a second birth, the  guru being his father, the Savitri (also known as Gayatri) mantra being his  mother, as he himself is born again, dvi-jati. In addition to the thread worn  for a lifetime (and occasionally renewed in a special ceremony) he receives a  staff (danda) of palasa wood, a symbolic piece of the skin of a black antelope  (krsnajina), and a waistband (mekhala) of three strands of munja grass (later  replaced by a three-strand cotton cord like the upavita). Rg Veda 3.8.4 is a  mantra recited by the guru as he knots the belt. Elderly pandits or their sons  or grandsons will present for admiration today the staffs and skin fragments  carefully kept for eighty or more years. Sons who are quick learners are given  special privileges and are sometimes exempt from secular chores taken up 

Becoming a Veda 143 

by their siblings. Baballa, for one, credited his father with providing him a  secure learning environment and a youth that he recalled with great affection  some seventy years later. 

Konasima Brahmans who wish to preserve the integrity of their lineages  insist on a full five days for both upanayana and marriage ceremonies. After  investiture, the second and third days of the former are devoted to instructions  of the boy in agni-karya since he now takes on responsibility for collecting fire 

wood and maintaining the ritual fire, or fires if the guru is a nitya or continual  agni-hotrin. Here is the youngster’s first step on the path to becoming Agni,  the detailed subject of Chapter 6. His duties now may also include milking the  agni-hotra cow if he has not already assumed that task. The guru instructs him  in proper procedures for two essential rituals that will endure through life:  first, making homa offerings into the fire, and second, worshipping the sun,  Savitr or Surya. The latter, known as sandhya or sandhya-vandana, occurs at the  two “joints” of the day when direct sunlight begins or ends, standing for the  former, sitting for the latter. This involves several short exercises that quickly  become habitual, beginning with recitations of the newly learned Gayatri man tra and followed by offerings to the sun of water (arghya) into his mouth over  the heel of his hand and then scattered across his body three times. Involving  his body again in sandhya he performs prana-yama, yogic breath control, and  the strategic touching and purifying of his body in nyasa. Scores of interviews  for this book were curtailed due to the evening sandhya. In something of an  apology for having not one of his seven sons learn Veda, Lanka several times  would say, “Well, at least I taught them correctly in the Gayatri and sandhya.”  Women of the household may also be simultaneously worshipping the sun in  Surya namaskara, although without the Gayatri. 

On the fourth day of upanayana medha-janana is the ritual instillation of  wisdom (medha) and the necessary memory for Veda, actually a reinforcement  of an early samskara, rite of passage, his initial birth, known as jata-karma,  performed by his parents and the family purohita. The fifth day is a conclud 

ing ritual when the boy does bhiksa, begging for food as an ascetic from house  to house, like the honey bee described in Chapter 2, first circling back to call  at his own front door where he is certain to receive food from his mother. As  the community of householders is bound to sustain world renouncers, those  beyond the first three life stages, so the same community supports the brah 

macarin at the outset of his Vedic career. The two modes of existence, both  celibate, bracket the passionate world of samsara.4 

With his new thread over his left shoulder and under his right arm the seven or eight-year-old touches the feet of his guru, usually his father but possibly his  grandfather, older brother, uncle, or more distant relative, and in the technique 

144 vedic voices 

of adhyaya sits down before him to hear and then recite back a phrase at a time.  They begin sometime after the dawn samdhya and continue daily through the  dark and bright halves of the lunar month with the exception of eight speci fied break days of an-adhyaya, days without new recitations when review of past  lessons, or study of Mimamsa, Dharma Sastras, or other acolyte texts take the  place of a fresh Taittiriya recitation. Each new- or full-moon day, as well as the  day succeeding, is considered a day off. Lanka noted that trying to learn Veda  on amavasya, new-moon day, is like fetching water in a sieve. Rolling thunder  and lightning strikes, sometimes dangerous near tall palm trees, may also be  grounds for cessation. Calendars of astrological reckoning (pancanga) are rou 

tinely consulted to discover exactly when lunar days, tithis, begin and end. After eight to twelve years of this routine the young man who survives the  rigors of brahmacarya is Veda, or at least his hereditary portion—in this case,  the Taittiriya tradition with Apastamba as a set of Sutras. Upon successful  final examinations he is certified as a Veda pandit and his “commencement”  activates a Vaidika career. 
