+++
title = "2 The Work of the Text"

+++

The process of retaining successive phrases of text, however, is familiar to out siders only in part. The small boy with impressionable brain cells has a calling  and faces a syllabus unbelievably daunting in its totality. True, he is adding  but one line at a time. Nevertheless, pressure from the cumulative weight of  successive days is enormous, the task being so formidable that the dropout  rate is high. The survivor of early learning is enrolled in something close to a  degree program broken into eighty-two “questions,” the classical Telugu panna,  from Sanskrit prasna. This might be compared with a sequence of eighty-two  “courses,” all of them charged to memory. As noted in Chapter 2 the Konasima  syllabus for the Vedic student, anticipating the examination system, begins  with the third or fourth kanda of the Taittiriya Samhita, those two sections  considered to be softest for starters. The seven kanda are memorized in five  portions, making up forty-four panna, or slightly more than half of the syl 

labus. The “dependent” (Telugu parayatta) portion of thirty-eight panna is the  second half of the brahmacarin’s course work, that is, the Taittiriya Brahmana  of twenty-eight panna followed by the ten panna of the Taittiriya Aranyaka and  Taittiriya Upanisad. Thus they make up the eighty-two panna in what might  be construed as the common Vaidika high school diploma plus undergraduate  degree. Tacked on are the aphorisms of two ritual manuals, Apastamba Srauta  and Grhya Sutras, further explored in Chapter 6 on the ritual life.

Becoming a Veda 145 

It was stressed in Chapter 2 that the traditional belief in the Veda as apau ruseya, without human authorship, without origin, being unitary and eternal,  goes unchallenged among Vedic Brahmans. There can be no admission of  a literary chronology, or even the suggestion that writing intruded upon the  Vedic oral heritage as it did in the disastrous case of the Avesta in ancient  Iran.5 Outside readers, however, require some buoys in this great sea of mate rial and perhaps here is the place to launch some quite rough estimates to  date the four Samhitas and ensuing texts, all dated bce. Clearly the Rg Veda  is the original one, its early portions compiled in the middle of the second  millennium with hymns that may have been composed as early as 1700 and  a fuller set of ten collections extant perhaps two centuries later. The other  three Samhitas, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, and Atharva Veda, depend upon the  Rg Veda and are presumed to have been compiled between 1500 and 1000.  The Brahmana-texts, including the Taittiriya, were probably assembled dur 

ing the centuries from 1000 to 800 and the Aranyakas, again including the  Taittiriya, perhaps well before 600. The two early Upanisads, Brhadaranyaka  and Chandogya, are dated to the seventh or sixth centuries, with a probable  period of composition for the Taittiriya, Aitareya, and Kausitaki in the sixth  or fifth centuries and the remaining Upanisads in the late centuries bce. The  Srauta Sutras were perhaps composed in the sixth or fifth century, Baudhayana  and Apastamba counting among the oldest, with Hiranyakesin slightly later,  these three Taittiriya Sutras being most frequently followed in Konasima. The  dependent Grhya Sutras for domestic rituals followed within another two  centuries. Many of these round-figured dates are contested among scholars  although there is far more of a consensus today than half a century ago.6 It  is remarkable to think of the millennium of time during the composition of  the Taittiriya corpus that is transmitted in Andhra although, again, no one  who receives it and passes it on to another is ever permitted to imagine such  a chronology. 

To return to tradition and the youngster in the predawn twilight striving  to control the nineteenth of the forty-four panna of the Taittiriya Samhita, it is  understandable that he has no more distancing from the massive text of Veda,  no more appreciation of immense and variegated genres still in front of him,  than an American fifth-grade student has of the place of civics or trigonometry  in the great scheme of things. Transmission of the approved Western aca 

demic curriculum is just something that happens, and keeps on happening,  until some light dawns and connections regarding “knowledge” are obtained.  Something, however, is said to occur in the brahmacarin who survives the early  dropout stage of adhyaya and aspires to become one among these rare reposi 

tories of Veda.146 vedic voices 

Two key terms are applied to those who are receptive to transmission: vyas ana, passion, and asakti, curiosity. The word vyasana that Telugu inherited from  Sanskrit connotes not only passion but also obsession, excessive attachment,  even addiction. Vaidika Brahmans use the term in a positive sense, redolent of  prideful censure for overdoing it, with reference to those addicted to a lifetime of  learning through Veda and beyond. The younger two generations describe the old  men—their fathers and grandfathers—with unmitigated awe. Their kind of pas 

sion, their addiction, the young men say, is gone, and may not be seen again. The  old men agree, and speak with nostalgia of bygone times in the agrahara when  that tumult of mantra could be heard at all hours of the day, except, they add, “per haps between midnight and 3:00 am.” But the old men also invoke the Telugu  word asakti, curiosity, inquisitiveness. A stretching of the imagination about Veda  should occur before passion is aroused. In a child such curiosity can be identified  

as easily as passion, and no one today says that it has disappeared entirely. What must be added to an understanding of Veda adhyaya, however, is the  mythic dimension adhering to the space of transmission, namely, the agra hara itself. It is impossible to overestimate. The surrounding terrain is punya  ksetra, a sacred site, a place of merit and power, and therefore a place where  adhyaya is possible. It begins with the fact that the rsi, said to live “for 300  or 600  years,” are still here and can occasionally be glimpsed in predawn  mists on the Kausika stream, the Godavari channel named for Kusika, the  maharsi Visvamitra. Also here are the ancestors (pitr), including senior ahi tagni who died in recent years, who “watch everything we do.” The certified  Vedic Brahman identifies with both, the fabled rsi of the Great Time in which  Veda was first overheard, and the ancestors who have transmitted Veda into  the present day. Some ahitagni provide names of both maternal and paternal  lineages for eight to ten generations in their Veda pandit heritage. Other holy  beings who emerge in this punya ksetra include powerful sadhu who validate  the terrain as a place of power and possibility. Surely, reflects the intrepid brah macarin who hears his elders’ tales in the early darkness of the evening meal,  prodigious feats of learning may continue in a place such as this. Transmission involves, in a remarkable reciprocity, what might be consid ered sound mysticism. The student, day by day, year after year, is bonded to  his guru by mantric sound (sabda). He hears, and replicates, the guru’s voice  as text. He will always hear the guru’s voice as text because he has appropri ated Veda in that voice as his own. The Vedic Brahman enlivens a remark of  Bachelard’s: “By certain of its traits, childhood lasts all through life.”7 These  infinite strands of sacred sound accumulated over the years of childhood are  a single resident voice, simultaneously the voice of the rsi, of the guru, of the  carefully constructed textual self. This remains true long after the death of this 

Becoming a Veda 147 

latter-day rsi who has given spiritual birth to him. And when he participates in  group recitations he inserts his own voice, his guru’s voice, to blend into the  community text. As the text has entered his mind so has he interiorized and  immortalized his father and grandfather. After years of emulation, syllable by  syllable, accent by accent, the guru endures as aural seed, until each recitation is  a re-presentation of the guru. In bhakti-like reverence, the Veda pandit may fre 

quently say of a guru who was not his biological father, “First I remember him,  and then I remember my father.” And it was noted of the forty-four-year-old son  of Duvvuri Yajulu (who did serve as guru) that when he began to teach Veda to  his own sons he could finally approach his father to say something although  he still could not “sit down with him” because that was the exclusive posture of  adhyaya. The Vedic student carries for life the mnemonics of place—the agra hara resounding with mantras—and the mnemonics of time—brahmacarya as  a rite of passage. In later life every recitation has the capacity to evoke the guru’s  voice, the guru’s house, the agrahara, the auspicious territory. 

In his studies of the Greek New Testament Paul Ricoeur discussed what he  perceived as parallelism between the Gospels as encompassing narrative and  parables embedded within them, a “mirror relation” between large and small  texts and the ways in which something passes from one to another. He was  also intrigued by what he called “the work of the text,” a “reverberation of the  narrative-parable on the person who tells it.”8 This perspective may shed light  on dimensions of the Vaidika career, both textual and ritual. The Vedic stu 

dent appropriates a given embedded micro-text in an entirely personal scale,  being held responsible for it whenever he is ready, two months, six months,  eight months, a year. There is no enforced schedule, and variations in overall  student readiness, as noted previously, may be measured in years. The brah 

macarin “makes haste slowly” at his task as all the while he encounters the  encompassing macro-text, Veda, in various guises. Further, he will discover on  a daily basis familiar mantras embedded in his newly heard lessons, powerful,  familiar sound bytes he has overheard in various contexts, and these enable  him to link together alien elaborations on unfamiliar passages. It is the text  working, reverberating on the reciter, although here it is not visual but aural  senses that are conduits for solidification and intensification. 
