+++
title = "4 Advanced Degrees"

+++

The career of the long-married Veda pandit, soon to be united with his wife,  now follows a trajectory with multiple options. The Taittiriya Samhita is trans mitted in several forms, vikrti, “modifications” of the “original” or model text.  The student began with the continuous (samhita) recitation (patha). After  completing samhita-patha he then proceeded to pada-patha, the same text over  again broken down to separate words, pada, without regard to grammatical  rules that alter certain initial and final letters when they are adjoining. Then  he could continue for a third time with the same text in krama-patha, a step-by step recitation. The first and second recitation patterns are normative; most  teenage students opt for a krama-patha examination and certification.

Becoming a Veda 149 

The best and brightest students, however, may take a plunge into the more  difficult recitations of the Taittiriya Samhita, the ghana-patha, for example, a  compact braided form that was mastered by Duvvuri Phani, Yajulu’s grand son, and by the sons of Gullapalli Sitaram Sastri and now his grandsons. Some  may generate a career out of such recitations as ghana-pathi, masters of ghana who recite professionally at pandit assemblies or other auspicious occasions,  sometimes in pairs or quartets for antiphonal response.10 They become alche mists working the sounds, transforming the mantras, and transporting their  hearers and quite frequently themselves, with their rich and powerful sym phonic performances. They do this in an entirely different mode from that  of the specialists in the Sama Veda during a soma sacrifice. The jata-patha is  another difficult recitation pattern attempted briefly by many but managed by  few. Popular among Nambudiri Brahmans in Kerala is ratha-patha, the “char iot” recitation that has never been in fashion in Konasima. 

On the other hand, rather than pursue other textual modifications of his  hereditary Veda, after the sequence of Taittiriya Samhita, Brahmana, Aranyaka,  and Upanisad, the skillful student may turn to one of the other Vedas, another  sakha, one of the several other schools or “branches” of Veda that emerged in  India during the centuries of composition of the Upanisads.11 For “grad school”  there are choices. Family tradition may direct the student into a second Veda  such as the Rg Veda, followed perhaps by portions of the Sama Veda, and  later the Atharva Veda. These students will “collect” portions of Vedas from  other gurus, often in other places. Lanka, for example, learned the basics from  Baballa’s father, then ghana and a great deal of srauta knowledge from the ahi tagni father of Mitranarayana, his future son-in-law, and later in life acquired  much of the Atharva Veda from yet another mentor. In his early years Duvvuri  Yajulu learned first from his father for four years before spending five years  more, like Lanka, with Baballa’s father, Chinna Subrahmanya Somayajulu,  in Mukkamala, followed by years with gurus in Korumilli, Vyaghresvaram,  and Tanuku learning srauta, Sama Veda, and additional texts. The pandit  Samavedam learned from three successive gurus in three different villages  but stayed within the Taittiriya corpus and did not study srauta. 

If the “returned” Taittiriya student begins adhyaya in some portion of the  Rg Veda, for example, with the same or a different guru, he faces a Samhita  with 1,028 hymns (sukta), comprised of rk, metrical verses, and collected in  ten mandala. His childhood went into learning the Taittiriya texts and within  them were numerous Rg Veda mantras and brahmana discussions of them.  Lanka, who learned about three-fourths of the Rg Veda Samhita, his lessons  coming from a division of the text into astaka, eight sections, was also drawn  to the Asvalayana Srauta Sutra, the ritual manual for the Rg Veda. In one 

150 vedic voices 

remarkable pedagogical swap Kapilavayi Yajnesvara Agnihotra Sastri and  Tangirala Balagangadhara Sastri exchanged guru and student (sisya) roles in  Kapilesvarapuram in reciprocal teaching of the Rg Veda and Atharva Veda  Samhitas. So dominant is the Taittiriya Samhita, however, that only a few  hereditary families of Rg Vedins may be found today in the Godavari Delta.11 

If a family member has gained knowledge of part or all of the Sama Veda  the student may aspire to learn from him some of that astonishing seven note  score. The udgatr priest chanting alone, or becoming a choir with two of his  three acolytes, employs the saman, chants in a musical scale, to extend, repeat,  and draw out every possible ounce of meaningful sound from the basic Rg  Vedic mantra it highlights. Most saman make use of mantras found in hymns  from the ninth or eighth mandala of the Rg Veda. The udgatr hymnal is a gana,  a collection of melodies essential for the most sacred of sacrifices, the soma. The  gana generated from each saman-mantra can number in the thousands and no  one claims mastery of all. Mitranarayana in Kakinada, a member of the Pisapati  family in West Godavari, and the Kapilavayi brothers are among the last of the  old guard with a longtime srauta heritage still capable of using a Sama-gana  prayoga compilation that has been handed down through generations. 

As noted in Chapter 2 (n. 8) the few remaining soma-sacrificing families  highlight the significance of retaining coastal Andhra’s Sama-gana tradition  and insist on its unique character and style, unlike recensions employed by  Taittiriyins elsewhere in India. The Jaiminiya recension of Kerala is never  mentioned. At stake are Kauthuma and Ranayaniya, versions considered  by some Western scholars to be essentially the same. If they were identi 

cal, however, there would not persist an enormously contentious matter in  Konasima, the bitter charge that the Daksina (Southern) or Madras Sama gana, derived from the Kauthuma, was incorrectly imported to Andhra by the  Dendukuri family, thus “contaminating” the age-old srauta tradition. Perhaps  it is a composite of Ranayaniya gana in the “local” style. Lanka insisted that  diluting Ranayaniya with Kauthuma elements was a dangerous mixing of tra ditions. Now that the elder Konasima ahitagni have passed on and a tradition  of routinely held great sacrifices has moved west from Konasima to Krishna  District it will be far more difficult to sustain that charge regarding the Sama gana role in yajna.12 

Kapilavayi Yajnesvara Agnihotra Sastri, the itinerant collector of Vedas,  went to live in Kasi (Varanasi) in order to learn all forty adhyaya of the Sukla  (White) Yajur Veda, a Veda known also as the Vajasaneyi Samhita, concluding  with the Isa Upanisad. Hereditary Vajasaneyins are as few in East Godavari  today as Rg Vedins.13 Separation of pandits by sakha is not as severe as once  was the case. Middle generation Vaidika Brahmans remember a time when 

Becoming a Veda 151 

interdining, sitting in the same line for food, was not possible between  Taittiriyins and Vajasaneyins. Now, however, they may eat in the same hall.  Honoraria for recitations were also unequal in the past, Vajasaneyins receiv ing only half as much, even when reciting the same text, as their syllabus was  considered to be less demanding. And it is true that the Vajasaneya Samhita  is perhaps half the length of the Taittiriya Samhita. Unlike the Krsna Yajur  Veda that contains vidhi or brahmana portions, injunctions and commentar ies, mixed in with mantras and yajus formulas, these explicative passages are  reserved in the White Yajur Veda corpus for the quite lengthy Brahmana, the  Satapatha, the Brahmana “of a hundred paths.” An interesting if extremely  derogatory Telugu epithet is used by Taittiriyins with regard to such sakha dis tinctions. Vajasaneyins of the Madhyandina recension of the Sukla Yajur Veda  (not the Kanva branch) are known locally as madhyanna Malas, meaning they  are Untouchable Malas until midday (Telugu madhyanna) when they suddenly  become Brahmans. Such verbal antagonism may reflect an ancient dispute  between the sakha in this region of South India.14 

The Atharva Veda Samhita has two mostly similar recensions, Saunaka  and Paippilada, of which the former is known in the delta. Like the Taittiriya  Samhita, the text is arranged in kanda, collections, of sukta, hymns, 730  hymns assembled in twenty cycles, mostly metrical but containing some  prose. There are no Atharva Veda hereditary families although more than a  dozen individuals have received all or substantial portions of the Saunakiya  recension of that fourth Veda, primarily for personal, not community-wide  rituals. Pandits surveyed in Chapter 3 include Lanka who learned much of the  Atharva Veda, his guru being Tangirila in Kapilesvarapuram. Duvvuri Yajulu  also learned numerous portions, one reason being his need for mantras in  a vain attempt to stave off increasing blindness from glaucoma. Neither of  them learned hymn by hymn in a fashion that might be expected by an out side scholar, however, but rather by selection of anuvaka, portions of kanda,  for specific ends. Lanka claimed the benefits of santi, peacefulness, pusti, 

prosperity, and abhicara, by which he meant counter-sorcery or defensive  charms that he recited to ward off an enemy’s malign intent. At one critical  juncture he believed that Atharva Veda mantras saved his life. The Kapilavayi  brothers also learned the Atharva Veda, Rama Sastri in order to serve in  parayana in the Annavaram temple as an Atharva pandit, Venkatesvara in  order to qualify as a catur-vedin and emulate his father’s record as knower of  all four Vedas. 

In addition to pursuing other vikrti of the Taittiriya Samhita or turning to  Vedas in other sakha the young man with increasing abilities and an expanded  resumé, thinking ahead to living with his wife and starting a family, may 

152 vedic voices 

choose further studies with a pandit elsewhere in the agrahara or in another  village or town, with a focus on one of the Vedangas, “limbs of Veda.” These  texts, some as old as the fifth century bce, aphoristic in style, are designed  as sciences to further transmission and understanding of the Vedas. Already  mentioned are the Sutras of Apastamba, his Srauta, Grhya, and Dharma  Sutras, respectively, manuals for sacrificial, domestic, and legal or traditional  rituals. In the delta these are part of the standard curriculum. Popular options  beyond Apastamba include Vyakarana, grammar, obviously significant for tex tual learning, particularly important in the transition from Vedic to Classical  Sanskrit, and Jyotisa, astronomical and astrological reckoning to determine  and interpret calendric time. 

Less frequently studied are phonetics, prosody or metrics, and etymology,  respectively, Siksa, Chandas, and Nirukta. Loosely counted as another limb  is Mimamsa, inquiry into the meaning of the Veda, vedartha, going beyond  mantras and precepts to contextualization. Duvvuri Surya Prakasa, as noted in  Chapter 3, invested several years in post-graduate studies of the vidhi, injunc 

tions that lie beneath ritual acts according to ritual theory in Mimamsa.15 He  also studied Dharma Sastras, evolved from the earlier Dharma Sutras, reserv ing considerable attention for Manava Dharma Sastra, the Laws of Manu. 

Certification from further studies in any of these branches of learn ing adds to credentials and increases authority when attending a local or  regional pandit assembly, a sabha, for debates and exchanges of information  on current Vedic events. If he becomes certified in the Apastamba texts for  domestic rituals, often a father-to-son transmission of expertise for heredi tary clientele, he may also become a family purohita for other Brahmans,  asked to conduct marriages, housewarmings, thread ceremonies, or other  auspicious smarta (domestic) rites for small honoraria. This was a role that  Bulusu Cayanulu fulfilled in Sriramapuram and one that Duvvuri Surya  Prakasa still holds. 

In lineages of srauta sacrificers a young pandit might be recruited into a  role as rtvij, one of the staff of four priests necessary for fortnightly offerings  known as isti on new- or full-moon days and annual harvest rites, or even  one of the sixteen to eighteen priests in an extended rite such as a fire-altar  construction lasting forty days. Kapilavayi Agnihotra Sarma served as rtvij in such a paundarika at the age of fourteen. Even after graduating from celi 

bate studentship and becoming a householder the Veda pandit is engaged  in post-graduate studies, the lifelong learning that is the mark of agrahara residents who never seem to cease their quest for knowledge. And of course  “the Veda,” with scores of primary, acolyte, and commentarial texts, provides  unbounded territory for exploration.

Becoming a Veda 153 
