+++
title = "01 Absence of Caste in the Vedas"

+++

The Vedas depict a small civilization, beginning to settle on Indic soil. The small groups of which it consisted kept their Indo-European language, together with its poetic techniques, mythologies, the cults of fire and Soma and the knowledge of horses and chariots. That latter knowledge had been carried along with language across the mountain barriers that separate Central Asia from the Indic subcontinent. It was carried not by hordes of invaders, but in the minds of small groups of men who established alliances with local women. Language and ritual were transmitted from father to son. Fathers insisted that sons learned Vedic until transmission became ritualized \(as illustrated by the Gāyatrī mantra at the end of Chapter 11\). We hear little about the mother or the institution of marriage until the end of the Rigveda. Women came from many sections of the indigenous population and spoke various languages. They may have been ‘widely extending’ nymphs like Urvaśī, but at first they did not know Vedic and rarely, or ever, composed Vedas. Though matriarchal and matrilineal clans and tribes must have existed, it is not obvious that the general Indic pattern of dependence of women on men was in existence also. That pattern was formulated explicitly in post-Vedic times by the code of Manu or *Manu Sm*ṛ*ti* of the second century CE: as a child, a girl must remain under her father’s control, as a woman, under her husband, and when her husband is dead, under the sons. None of these restrictions may have existed or imply that a caste system existed in the Vedas.

That the indigenous population contributed substantially to the Vedas follows from the fact that the names of indigenous families, clans and tribes, became the names of Vedic *schools* \(*śākhā*\). Those subdivisions are the social units into which the Vedas came to be divided. There is not much of a hierarchy between them apart from the widely accepted fact that the Rigveda comes first. These units had no chieftains, not to mention bishops; but there were experts \(*brāhmaṇa*s\) of the language \(*bráhman*\) who included members of indigenous groups that had started using Vedic as a second, third or another language. Thus arose a vast edifice with undefined boundaries because it depended on ritual and other specialists with independent origins and independent minds. It was canonized only later as described at the end of the next chapter and depicted in Table 1.

Until we reach the latest stages, there is no evidence for any kind of caste system in the Vedas. It begins to be visible in late Vedic works and the post-Vedic *Dharma Sūtra*s. And is fully developed as a theory in the law book of Manu.

The hypothesis of caste being a Vedic institution is based upon the idea of invading hordes of Aryans who conquered indigenous lineages. There were no such invading hordes as we have seen. We know that nomadic or semi-nomadic tribes were looking for booty but that was not confined to speakers of Vedic. Nor is there evidence for ‘free Aryans and subjugated indigenous people’, the kind of phrase still used by modern historians of India such as Kulke and Rothermund. The genetic picture assigned both tribal and caste populations to indigenous lineages going back some 9,000 years. I do not know how much light DNA can shed on these matters, but that picture does not contradict anything we have gathered so far. Part I showed that they were no more than the adventures of nomadic pastoralists on the way to India and beginning to settle there.

To sum up this brief introduction: the interactions of a handful of Vedic speakers with indigenous groups, themselves speaking many languages and of great diversity in so far as we can reconstruct them, could not possibly have led to anything grand like a ‘new social system’. Post-Vedic India was and still is obsessed with caste and continues to attribute that idea to the Vedic Indians, whether they were regarded as scapegoats or as its semi-divine originators. But do the Vedas not use terms such as *brahman*, *kṣatram* and *viś*? They do and it has been the cause of great confusion. The mistake of the large majority of writers has been to imagine that these terms refer to the names of the later castes, *brāhmaṇa*, *kṣatriya* and *vaiśya*. What do the Vedas themselves say?


