+++
title = "02 Vedic Evidence and Scholarly Discussions"

+++

Three lines of an early Rigvedic invocation of the Aśvins, divine twins who travel through space in their horse-drawn chariot, provide a picture of early Vedic civilization in a nutshell. In so doing, they make use of three of the four terms that underlie the later social system:
>
> ‘Promote the *bráhman* and promote poetic inspirations. Slay the demons, drive away pain and illness. Drink the pressed Soma in harmony with Sun and Dawn, o Aśvins\!

> ‘Promote the *kṣatram* and promote able-bodied men. Slay the demons, drive away pain and illness. Drink the pressed Soma in harmony with Sun and Dawn, o Aśvins\!

> ‘Promote cows and promote the *viś*. Slay the demons, drive away pain and illness. Drink the pressed Soma in harmony with Sun and Dawn, o Aśvins\!’ \(RV 8.35\).

We meet here with three basic concepts:
>
> *bráhman* or ‘language’, later connected with *brahmán*, ‘learned man’ or ‘priest’ \(note the accent difference\); *kṣatram* which means ‘power’ or ‘dominion’;

> *viś* which refers to ‘the people’ in the sense of those who are settled on the soil. It may also refer to milk bearing cows.

Sometimes we come across passages that evoke a united front of *brahma-kṣatram*. It refers to alliances between priests and chieftains directed against *viś*. It is likely that *viś* refers to indigenous groups that were sedentary. The three terms also occur in later prose compositions of the Yajurveda such as the Brāhmaṇas but it proves nothing: for we shall see that there is little that the composers of these works do *not* say. These same compositions mention the derived terms *brāhmaṇa*, *kṣatriya* and *vaiśya*, which later will refer to the three highest castes, but there is no fixed hierarchy among them and it sometimes looks as if order does not matter at all. An example from a Yajurveda Brāhmaṇa: ‘The seers of yore say that the *vaiśya* is born of the Rigveda, the *kṣatriya* of the Yajurveda, the *brahmán* of the Sāmaveda.’ A composition in prose from the Sāmaveda mentions three boys who were reared by hyenas. Each was given a boon and they chose, in order of seniority, *kṣatram*, *bráhman* and *viś*. When hierarchies display so much variation, even if it is due to hyenas, the only thing that remains is the number three.

Composers of the Vedas are fascinated by many numbers, but three is the number they seem to like best. It is the one uncontroversial feature of the vision defended, half a century ago, by Georges Dumézil. He believed in a grand Indo-European tripartite scheme of *fonctions*, as he called them. They apply to many things, including deities and social classes, not only among ancient Indians but among Iranians, Celts, Greeks, Romans and others. The French word *fonction* is even vaguer than its English cognate *function*. It means, apart from ‘function’, also ‘post’, ‘office’ or ‘occupation’.

Dumézil’s ideas continue to be widely discussed, especially by religious scholars and students of religion in the United States and France. Dumézil started with the Iranian, but its society is different from the ancient Indian. Vedic society itself is much more complex than the simplistic triads of Dumézil suggests. I shall not try to summarize the extensive discussions that have followed but make an exception for the critique of John Brough, which is not only thorough and authoritative, but also entertaining. He has shown that Dumézil’s arguments apply equally well to the Hebrew monotheism of the Old Testament as to Indo-European mythology.

The alleged specificity of the three *fonctions* is applicable to Biblical monotheism because any divinity has various aspects. In the Rigveda, Varuṇa is an ancient and ambiguous deity on whose nature scholarly opinions vary. Dumézil stresses his wrathful features though he is sometimes willing to ‘untie’ the sins committed by his worshippers. Twelve invocations of the Rigveda, out of over a thousand, are addressed to Varuṇa and twenty-three to a dual-divinity called Mitra–Varuṇa, in which Mitra is not only, as his name indicates, a friend but also a personification of contract, another meaning of the word. According to Dumézil, Varuṇa and Mitra–Varuṇa exemplify the Brahman class.

Brough shows that Dumézil’s argument equally applies to the jealous god of the penitential psalms of the Old Testament, who is, like Mitra, the god of a covenant. The Hebrew god is also mighty in battle, which is the *kṣatriya*’s domain. He furthermore ‘causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth’ \(Psalm 104.14\). It sounds like a translation of a Vedic phrase on *viś* which refers to the life of farmers after which the *vaiśyas* were named.

The small number of invocations of Varuṇa and Mitra represents a cult that is more ancient than the cult of Indra which pervades the entire Rigveda. According to R.N. Dandekar, Varuṇa was a deity of the early Indo-Aryans of Bactria. I have used this cult with its puzzling features because it is relatively small and manageable. Brough’s chief arguments are concerned with Indra, but they are extensive and detailed and I cannot pursue them here. Brough concludes that the three *fonctions* are so elastic—and therefore useless—that ‘any sufficiently extensive and diversified body of literature might be expected to produce significantly comparable results.’

None of these savants pay attention, and for good reasons, to another Vedic poem that is invariably quoted in general books about India to make a point about the caste system. I am referring to the ‘Hymn to Puruṣa’ \(RV 10.90\). Puruṣa is a primordial male and the poem assigns the terms *brahmán, rājanya, vaiśya* and *śūdra* to his mouth, arms, thighs and feet. Brahmán does not refer to caste but to a learned man or priest \(see above *Three: Civilization and Society*\). The place of the term *kṣatriya* is taken by *rājanya*, which refers to a person of princely status. There are factual and analytical anomalies about this poem. The first are that it is the only place in the Rigveda where the late term *śūdra*, and therefore a four-instead of a threefold division of social classes occurs. The analytical anomaly is: why should this poem support the idea of the later caste system, when its main point is to describe how that primordial male was dismembered and killed? Does it imply that castes are dismembered limbs and therefore dead?

The Puruṣa myth looks like a late addition to the Rigveda. It does not resemble any other Rigvedic myth and is not in accordance with any other Vedic reference to social distinctions. The only common features are negative. Puruṣa recurs in later Vedic compositions and still later, and in a different sense, in the philosophical system of the *Sāṃkhya*. That system has ancient roots but is concerned with enumerations and lacks structure. As for the term *jāti*, which long after the Vedas began to refer to caste by birth and applied, in due course, to hundreds of castes and sub-castes, the word is not common in Vedic and only used for ‘birth’. We have seen about birth that the status of a person, who is about to be born from an inter-tribal alliance, may depend on complex rules that vary from tribe to tribe.

Last but not the least, Vedic has no general term for social class such as the later word *varṇa*, which, in the Veda, exists but refers to ‘colour’, ‘outward appearance’ and especially ‘form’. In the epic, it means ‘caste’ but to attribute any such meaning to the Vedas is anachronistic.


