+++
title = "03 Varying Terminologies and the first ‘Vedic Villages’"

+++

The mere occurrence of terms such as *brāhmaṇa*s or ‘brahmans’ proves nothing about caste or caste distinctions. The Rigveda speaks of them often, but the term refers to various kinds of learned people, including ‘sages’, ‘poets’ and ‘priests’. The term *kṣatriya* has no settled meaning either, neither in the Rigveda, nor in later Vedic compositions. The Taittirīya Saṃhitā of the Black Yajurveda mentions *kṣat*ṛ which is a chamberlain or doorkeeper. The Tāṇḍya Brāhmaṇa of the Sāmaveda refers to ‘eight brave persons that hold up the kingdom’. The list ends with *kṣat*ṛ and *saṃgrahīt*ṛ. According to P.V. Kane, they are the names of high officers of some sort. Similar observations could be made with regard to other names that became caste names in the later hierarchy. But the chief difficulty is not that we would get entangled in a fruitless and abstract discussion of social systems. What we have to know first is who were the speakers of Vedic and the composers of the Vedas. We know that composing Vedas took place almost entirely within the continent, and that the Vedic language was a branch of Indo-Iranian that had come into existence a little earlier and further to the north. Those earlier peoples may have composed ‘Vedas’, but they are at best the precursors of the Vedas as we know them. The latter were composed by descendants of those precursors, as well as others and a variety of intermediaries as we have seen.

The alliances we have discussed include battles and one of these is mentioned specifically in the Rigveda: the Battle of Ten Kings who were, obviously, tribal chieftains. According to the Rigveda, the battle was won by the Bharatas. Their victory was due to the mantra power of their priest whose name was Vasiṣṭha, the ‘Most Excellent’ sage whose aristocratic pedigree connected him with Dawn \(*One: Geography of the Vedas and Their Language*\) and who is associated with the seventh circle of the Rigveda. The Bharatas, who gave their name to what is also called ‘India’, settled eventually on the banks of the Yamunā river.

‘Settling’ means settling with cattle, animal husbandry and increasing wealth. Cows were as important as horses, but horses remained rare and only the number of cows plays a role as a measure of wealth \(*Seven: Yajurveda* \). The development of Vedic terminology reflects other changes, such as the gradual replacement of the barley cultivation of Early Vedic pastoralism by the agriculture of rice. Civilization and society became gradually village-based.

Three stages of this process may be distinguished with the help of the semantic development of the term *grāma* as Wilhelm Rau has shown. In the Rigveda, it denoted a train of herdsmen, roaming about with cattle, ox-carts and chariots in quest of fresh pastures and booty. Subsequently, it came to refer to a temporary camp for such a train, made of bamboo poles and reed mats that could be quickly assembled. Towards the end of the Vedic period, *grāma* began to mean ‘village’. It continues to be used in that sense to the present day.

Concepts of civilization that seem to be ‘Vedic’ are more difficult to capture. I use ‘civilization’ rather than ‘society’ \(which is too narrow\) or ‘religion’ \(which is seriously misleading\) but all are very imprecise concepts. Features of civilization vary not only in different Vedas, but in different compositions within each Veda. We shall pay attention to more specific and useful concepts such as mantra, chant, knowledge, meditation and language, *brahman* and *brāhmaṇa*. Each of them has its own history. We cannot pursue these exercises in semantic history but it is difficult to make a meaningful generalization that goes beyond them unless we are happy with bland statements such as: the Vedic period was a period of dynamic change in civilization and society both.


