+++
title = "04 Rathakāra and a Note on Women"

+++

From what we have mentioned in Part I about the great prestige of experts who knew how to train horses or construct chariots with wheels with spokes—both specialized tasks that reflect a high level of technology—we would expect them to occupy an important, or at least a special place in early Vedic society. They might be assigned to a high caste had the notion of caste then existed. Would the chariot-maker give us an idea of Vedic society *before* the caste system? It should not be difficult to find information about this since there is a common term that refers to that chariot-maker: *rathakāra.*

The term *rathakāra* does not occur in the Rigveda. There is no other specialized term that refers to a professional who constructs a *ratha*. Does the term just happen to be absent, or is the Rigveda more concerned with the imagery and symbolic significance of the chariot? These questions are difficult or impossible to answer, but late explicitness of a term proves little. In the long poem about the battle of the ten chieftains \(Rigveda 7.18\), the term *ratha* does not occur. But there exists a technical terminology for many parts of chariots in the Vedas and especially in the Rigveda. They include terms for its various beams, axle, side-pieces, interior, seat, yoke, etc., and especially for the parts of its wheels: axle-pin, nave, felloe, spokes, etc. \(*Two: Archaeology and the Oral Tradition*\). There must have been professionals who were able to put these things together and should be referred to as ‘chariot makers’.

The term *rathakāra*, which becomes prominent later, is more interesting and puzzling than one might expect. I begin again with P.V. Kane who has some significant information, primarily from post-Vedic sources. I quote him *verbatim* \(*History of Dharmaśāstra*, Vol. II, Part I, 1930: 45–6\):
>
> The Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa \(I.1.4\) after stating that the *brāhmaṇa* should consecrate sacred fires in the spring, the *kṣatriya* in summer, the *vaiśya* in autumn, ordains that the *rathakāra* should consecrate sacred fires in the rainy season. The question arises whether the *rathakāra* is a member of the three higher castes who has taken in economic distress to the profession of making chariots or is a person belonging to a caste other than the three higher *varṇas.* Jaimini in his Pūrva Mīmāṃsā Sūtra \(VI.1.44–50\) discusses this question and establishes that the *rathakāra* is a member of a caste other than the three higher *varṇas*, that he has on account of the express words in the *śruti* the privilege to consecrate sacred fire with Vedic mantras, that the mantra for the consecration of *rathakāras* is ṛ*bh*ūṇāṃ *tvā* \(*Tai.Br.* I.1.4\) and that the *rathakāras* are the caste called *Saudhanvana* which is neither *śūdra* nor one of the three higher ones, but is slightly inferior to the three higher *varṇas*. Viśvarūpa \[a commentator on another *dharmaśāstra* work\] notices that in some *sm*ṛ*ti* the *rathakāra*, though not belonging to the three higher *varṇas*, was allowed the privilege of *upanayana*, but adds that this dictum of the *sm*ṛ*ti* is due to mistake, it being misled by the fact that he is allowed the privilege of *ādhāna* \(consecration of sacred fires\). In modern times, the members of the carpenter caste in certain parts of the Deccan at least are in the habit of performing the *upanayana* and wearing the sacred thread.

Here speaks a lawyer \(Kane was an advocate at the Bombay High Court and a senior advocate at the Federal Court of India\) and an expert on medieval and modern technical Sanskrit texts and treatises on a number of disciplines, including not only law and ritual but also the ritual philosophy of the *Mīmāṃsā* and the commentatorial literature on all these works. His terminology is replete with post-Vedic concepts, which does not affect the value of his work, but should be kept in mind when we are enquiring into the status of the original *rathakāra*.

Kane refers to many Vedic compositions by name, and I shall do the same in this *rathakāra* section. The reader is requested to chew on these names as if they were tobacco, a practice he or she may regard as refreshing or repulsive. Some will be explained later and I have retained them here only in case someone knows the names already, or wants to refer back to this section after they have become familiar. As for the other terms that Kane uses: *brāhmaṇa*, *kṣatriya*, *vaiśya* and *varṇa* do not have their post-Vedic meanings in the Rigveda, and *śūdra* occurs only in the so-called Puruṣa Hymn as we have seen in the section on ‘Absence of Caste in the Vedas’. The terms *śruti* and *sm*ṛ*ti* acquired the specific meanings used here only in the *dharmaśāstra* literature and have lasted until the present day: *śruti* refers to the Veda itself which came to be regarded as a supernatural revelation of non-human origin; and *sm*ṛ*ti* refers to Vedic or post-Vedic sources \(such as the Bhagavad Gītā\), based upon and therefore second in authority to *śruti*. The term *ādhāna* designates the consecration of sacred fires which is a basic feature of Yajurveda ritual; and *upanayana* is the initiation of the student which involves, among other things, investiture with the sacred thread. In sum, Kane’s paragraph is a straightforward expression of the Indic obsession with the caste system of the last two millennia. I am not saying that during that period it was always defended or adhered to, or that Kane himself was advocating it: but it is his frame of reference and is *not* applicable to the Vedas.

Kane’s long sentences combine the style of legal documents and that of the classical Sanskrit treatises and commentaries. The paragraph I quoted belongs to what scholars and students of Indian civilization will continue to regard as Kane’s greatest contribution: the monumental *History of Dharmaśāstra* in five volumes with several more parts, one of the great works of scholarship of the modern world. But his learned paragraph throws light on many more problems than the author is aware of and deserves close reading. So after clearing up the terminological jungle, let us take a brief look at Kane’s sources and what is known of their chronology.

The Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa was composed towards the end of the Vedic period, after 800 BCE, in Pañcāla from where it went south. It is clear from Kane’s quote that it accepted and advocated a system of three castes: the composers were beginning to act as legislators and their acceptance of caste would continue for millennia to come. Whether it was accepted by ‘Vedic society’, which by then had settled in many schools and independent villages, is another question. The most likely answer is that traces of something like it might have existed in some \(like the later Taittirīya compositions\) and remained unknown to many. One matter is clear: the position of the *rathakāra* caused problems for this system wherever it was beginning to raise its ugly head. His status must have been high *before* anything like the system of castes had been thought of. That is what we would expect if the first *rathakāra*s possessed knowledge that came from elsewhere and was new to the Indic subcontinent. Kane can envisage the *rathakāra* only as a village craftsman, not the owner of mysterious insights and technologies that he carries in his mind.

Other scholars have added new information, sometimes illustrating the high position of the *rathakāra*, but they have generally followed Kane’s line. Wilhem Rau tells us that during the Brāhmaṇa period, the *rathakāra* owned palatial residences because during the *aśvamedha* or horse sacrifice, the horse attendants stayed with him and what is more, there were four hundred such attendants according to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. Hertha Krick makes the same mistake as Kane: she is aware of the *rathakāra*’s high status, but assumes that he came from the ‘lowly indigenous people who had been conquered’—a straightforward restatement of the outdated, traditional view. Following a commentary on a Śrauta Sūtra, Gonda believes that ‘this artisan’ was given almost *kśatriya* status because it had become easier to achieve such status in later times.

I conclude that the *rathakāra* occupied a high social status in some Vedic circles long before anything like a ‘caste system’ existed. It doesn’t follow that his ancestors entered South Asia on a chariot, or carried chariots across the mountains, unless it was in their heads \(*manasā*\). All of the section on ‘Carts, Chariots and the Mind’ at the outset of Chapter 2 applies to him and is relevant to our understanding of his position.

The position of women in the Vedas is instructively similar to that of the *rathakāra* in some respects. Different in being subservient to fathers, husbands and sons, women are entitled to be *brahmavādinīs*, ‘speakers of *brahman*,’ which P.V. Kane translates, appropriately vaguely, as referring to ‘sacred lore’. It requires the initiation of *upanayana* and prescribes the wearing of a sacred thread and the keeping of a fire. Later commentators, mystified, explain the wearing of the sacred thread as ‘wearing the upper garment in the manner of the sacred thread’ though the original wording is unambiguous. According to Manu’s post-Vedic book of laws, women are eligible to perform rites but without reciting the accompanying mantras. It makes sense: the ritual use of mantras presupposes that they are already known but there is no tradition for the Vedas to be taught to women.

Having said that much—or little—it bears repeating that we should never look upon ‘The Vedas’ as a unit. Their riches and deficiencies are due to a great variety of people of different backgrounds and origins, living in different regions and interacting during an extended period of time. We shall see in the next section that composing poems in the early Vedic language, making a selection, putting it together and looking upon it as ‘The Rigveda’ took very roughly half a millennium. Something similar holds for two of the other three Vedas though much of their earlier histories are now lost. The only Vedic units to which we are able to assign more definite places of origin and less vague beginnings in time are the schools of the Yajurveda as we shall see.



