+++
title = "3 Children and Their Life-cycle Rites"

+++

In the center of the main room of the spacious and immaculate new house  a three-month-old baby is constantly rocked side-to-side in a wooden cradle  by his grandmother, Maruti, then swung vigorously head-to-toe in a green  hammock suspended from the ceiling. He sends out no cry for Dramamine.  Maruti has just performed a minor rite, something like an extra samskara,  life-cycle rite. The baby started making fists with his hands, as if squeezing  imaginary balls, so relatives came to be fed with fist-sized lumps (Telugu  mudda) of cooked rice. Here, as in every household, babies steal center stage  from older children running about. In Chapter 6 the diksa consecration is  detailed, a srauta ritual in which both sacrificer and wife are reborn, stammer ing and making fists like babies. 

“In the old days there was no ban on having children. In fact, the goal of  marriage is to obtain children.” Having said this, the correct ritual life always  uppermost in his mind, Lanka was quick to point out the three-debt obligation,  the rna mentioned in Chapter 2, as he effortlessly recited Taittiriya Samhita  6.3.10.5: “At birth a Brahman is born with three debts, studentship to the rsi,  sacrifice to the gods, and children to the ancestors.” Here Lanka recalled our  previous discussions of avadana, cuttings, portions of the dismembered goat  in pasu-bandha, animal sacrifice. Paying off these debts, he said, is accom plished in the fashion of offering pieces of the goat one at a time: learning and  reciting Veda as a student, performing sacrifices, and having a son to perpetu 

ate the lineage are the three debt payments.11 Lanka, like the other pandits, was  solicitous of the dora who has three daughters, no sons, and no continuing  lineage in his name. 

Lanka and Anasuya had eight children. Duvvuri Yajulu and Surya raised  ten children and so did Kamesvara and Satyavati. Such large families are strik ing in contemporary America and Europe but not so unusual in earlier times.  Lyman Beecher, the renowned nineteenth-century American evangelist, had  twelve children, one of whom was the equally eminent Henry Ward Beecher,  father of ten children. The Abolitionist, John Brown, hanged in 1859, had 

Becoming a Householder 171 

twenty children, seven from his first wife, thirteen from his second. Until  family planning was introduced and encouraged in mid-twentieth-century  India, a sizable number of offspring, especially sons, was the norm. Lanka  and Anasuya, with seven sons in a row, were considered in their day a peerless  model. The showcasing of sons is evident in Duvvuri Yajulu’s family photo.  (Figure 3.4 shows Duvvuri Yajulu and family on his sixtieth birthday, 1975.  Seated center right, Surya on Yajulu’s left; sons one to five extend prominently  from his right hand; five daughters are mixed with sons' wives in the fading  background.) 

Details about marriage rituals, laws, celebrations, dowry and other costs,  and sons were readily forthcoming from all Veda pandits but information  about daughters and grandchildren had to be gleaned from women, not  always immediately approachable until after several visits. In Baballa’s family a  daughter who lived only twenty days was mentioned only by a younger female  member of the family, not by Baballa himself. Lanka, when asked about chil 

dren, would always report on the seven sons. A daughter, the firstborn and, as  it turned out, his sole line of continuity in Veda, was an afterthought. A review  of the Veda pandit families outlined in Chapter 3 shows a range from one to  ten in the number of children actually brought up in the household: Duvvuri  Yajulu and Surya, ten; Kamesvara and Satyavati, ten; Lanka and Anasuya,  eight; Laksminarayana and Kamesvari, eight; Mitranarayana and Anasuya,  seven; Sita Ram Sastri and Narasamamba, seven; Samavedam and Kamala,  six; Bulusu Cayanulu and Subbalaksmi, five (with Cayanulu and his first wife  Rama Suryakanta one, for a total of six); Baballa and Sundari, one. Of these  nine senior pandits, identified here as the “old” generation as opposed to their  sons and colleagues in the “middle” generation, and their grandsons in the  “young” generation, the average number of children is seven. The number of  children who died in infancy, an understandably sensitive and largely undis closed topic, again reminiscent of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century  Europe and America, was rarely disclosed (one in one family, four in another). 

With the “middle” and “young” generations there is a sharp decrease in the  number of children, sons and grandsons with their spouses adhering closer in  each generation to the national slogan “We are two, we have two,” in an India  where half the population is under twenty-five years of age. With the exception  of Baballa, no pandit of the senior generation had fewer than six children. In  the “middle” generation few families are that large, and in the “young” gen 

eration, those now still in their childbearing years, it appears that once a son  or two is born, family planning locks in. Conception is celebrated as an enor mously significant milestone for newlyweds. Maruti moved to Annavaram at  age sixteen to begin a new household with Kapilavayi Rama Sastri. “For seven 

[[172]]

years I did not conceive. I tasted yajna-payasam (rice pudding made on the  sacrificial ground, believed to promote conception) from different sacrifices.  I was present at many yajna as I accompanied my husband and father-in-law  from sacrifice to sacrifice.” There was proof in the pudding: Maruti delivered  three girls and then finally, the obligatory boy to close her childbearing years  with four. Duvvuri Phani declared in 1998 after becoming father of two chil 

dren, both sons, that the second was the “final” child. Family planning, essen tially vasectomies, tube-tying, and contraceptives, denigrated by Lanka and  blamed for what he weighed as softness and a lack of stamina in the younger  generation, has been welcomed in a new age. In the case of Baballa’s grandson  Prasad and wife Laksmi, three daughters were followed by Laksmi’s inability  to bear more children. Sonless, with three girls requiring dowry, surrounded  by women who bore mostly or all sons, Laksmi’s vast, luminous eyes rapidly  dimmed with deep sorrow. 

Much has been said about the upanayana and Vedic study of boys from the  age of seven or eight. In Veda pandit lineages, girls, although ineligible for  the initiatory ritual and adhyaya, are not neglected when it comes to a Vedic  future. Married as early as seven or eight, the same age as boys hearing their  first mantra from a guru, girls hear the mantras for five nights in the vivaha ritual. If their families have a tradition of srauta practice, they will have grown  up observing sandhya-vandana, twice daily milk offerings, new- and full-moon  rites, harvest rituals, and many other ceremonies, and become entirely famil 

iar with the rules of madi. As a boy progresses through his portions of Veda,  largely unknown to his bride in another village or agrahara, her parents will be  conscious year by year of her suitability as patni, possibly in a sacrificial career. 

Turning now to the samskara, rites of passage, some have already been  noted, including the upanayana thread investiture for a boy that marks entrance  into the first life stage (asrama), that of the celibate student; the sama-vartana that signals completion of initial Veda instruction; and the vivaha marriage  ceremony that observes passage into the second life stage, the householder.  Also noted was the rite of impregnation (garbha-dhana), placement of an  embryo in the womb of the bride, originally on the fourth night of marriage  but today occurring after the bride attains puberty and leaves the home of  her parents to live with her husband of several years. As the upanayana is the  most significant life-cycle transition for a young boy, so is puberty the crucial  life change for a girl since it indicates readiness for marriage and entrance  into womanhood. And yet the event of menarche is not a samskara and goes  without remark in the male-oriented Sutras. The concern for proper paternity  of offspring has pushed back the timing of marriage to a safe distance prior to  puberty and allowed the bride’s biological change to take place in the parental 

Becoming a Householder 173 

home with due family, but not priestly, recognition. Nothing, however, has  altered the central emphasis on procreative powers of females as the key to  continuing existence. The principal image of the bride is a fertile field where  seed will be sown and a living child emerges in verification of fecundity. 

The total number of life-cycle rites is not fixed and there is no tradition  of performance required of everyone. Most families, however, adhere to the  same pattern and follow Apastamba’s Grhya Sutra coverage of what are some times taken to be a set of sixteen, a number perhaps derived from the ancient  soma tradition. Like several other Grhya Sutra authors, Apastamba begins with  betrothal, marriage, and a desired conception of a new being. As noted, fire  from the bride’s parents’ home (venue for the five-day marriage) is taken to  establish the new domestic hearth, and that fire will be the cynosure of all sub sequent rites of passage. Just as rice, coconuts, and other agricultural products  are central to marriage rituals, so too will they recur in many samskara, ripen ing being a key metaphor for the steady progress of an individual life-body. 

In the sixth chapter of Apastamba two prenatal rituals are addressed, the  pumsavana with its desire that the embryo be a male child, performed usually  in the third month when pregnancy becomes visible, and simantonnayana,  the upward parting of the wife’s hair by the husband, usually in the fourth  month of the first pregnancy only, a graphic expression for safe delivery from  the womb. Although the general belief is that the mother’s contribution to an  embryo is uterine blood and the “soft” internal parts, while the father’s con 

tribution is semen and the “hard” parts, with the stronger one determining  gender, the astonishing fact that a ritual such as pumsavana can alter gender a  dozen weeks into embryonic development testifies to the power of mantra and  performance. If the result is a male child, confirmation is readily announced.  If no one mentions pumsavana again, a female child was born. 

Both prenatal rites employ special items, the one for a male child a green  shoot from a banyan tree bearing two figs resembling testicles. The mother-to be lies on her back near the fire while her husband presses into her right  nostril a small bit of the ground shoot from that tree famous for its aggressive  spread. Mantras express hope for an easy delivery. For simantonnayana she sits  by the fire while her husband stands behind and combs her hair three times,  first with a porcupine quill with three white spots, then three blades of darbha grass, finally with a twig from a different fig tree, the udumbara. New barley  sprouts are fixed to her hair and she touches a calf. 

The delivery itself becomes a ritual, jata-karman, birth-rite, performed if  possible even before the umbilical cord is cut. The “production of wisdom”  is the initial act when the father uses a gold spoon or ring dipped in honey,  curds, and ghee to touch the infant’s mouth while whispering into the right 

[[174]]

ear the name of Vak, sacred speech. Mantras about ayus, long life, are followed  by the endowment of a secret name, known only to the parents, and the infant  is given to the mother’s right breast. The next ten days are the period of con finement of mother and child in the birth room, a place of impurity where a  special prophylactic fire or lamp, sutika-agni, is burning. Emergence of mother  and child on the tenth day is auspicious and calls for nama-karana, the rite  of name giving, when the secret name is augmented by a public name for  lifelong use until honorific titles are earned in replacement, Yajulu, Cayanulu,  Somidevamma, Somayaji, for example. 

The number ten is significant. For ten lunar cycles (nine solar months) the  embryo developed in the womb, undergoing personal construction through  samskara from garbha-dhana to jata-karman. At the other end of this existence,  this rebirth, there will be a similar period of ten days after death and crema 

tion for ritual construction by means of mantras, rice, sesame, and water of  a temporary cover for the naked, vulnerable spirit (preta or jiva). Those ten  days after cremation will simultaneously eliminate the pollution of death and  create, body part by body part, a transitional shelter that allows the enduring  spirit to become a pitr, ancestor, and receive a new body to continue in another  birth. Thus mother and newborn child are freed from the impurity of birth  pollution in the confinement room, as the baby exited the mother after gesta 

tion, as the spirit emerged before and will emerge again from its previous and  future temporary bodies, all on a scale of ten.12 

The next important ritual after name-giving is the first feeding of the  infant with solid food, most significantly, rice, in the anna-prasana. The baby’s  lips were touched at birth with honey and two products of the cow, curds and  ghee. Now, after about six months of mother’s milk, it is sacred homegrown  rice (anna, the same word meaning “food”) that is featured in another ritual,  cooked rice being mixed with the trio of honey, curds, and ghee. Apastamba  makes no mention of nis-kramana, literally stepping out, the first occasion for  the baby to go out of doors in the arms of a parent to see the sun and moon,  usually in the fourth month. It is, however, observed by some pandit families  as it is in the wider Hindu culture. 

Apastamba finds a place in the child’s third year for the caula ritual, also  known as cuda-karana, the first tonsure. This mirrors something of the simon tannayana for the mother-to-be in the use of a porcupine quill, darbha grass,  and fig-tree twigs to comb the hair of a male child before it is shaved away,  leaving only the cuda, tufts at the back of the head as daily reminder of ances tors when they are named during sandhya-vandana. The placement of a wire  ring, right ear first for boys, left ear first for girls, is the earlobe piercing,  karna-vedha. Apastamba and Hiranyakesin tuck this rite in at the end of the 

Becoming a Householder 175 

upanayana when the boy ornaments his body in the ritual attempt to make  him presentable for marriage. Here Hiranyakesin, who invokes the two Vedic  meters known as Viraj and Svaraj, supplies mantras and details including an  encomium on the formative powers of gold. Current Veda pandit families per 

form this on babies of three or four months. Later in life the ahitagni acquire  heavy gold earrings to mark the completion of soma sacrifices, their earlobes  strikingly drawn down to reveal large rectangular gaps. 

At the age of sixteen the first shaving of facial hair on a boy is accompa nied by another shaving of the head, this time including the tufts at the back  left growing during cuda-karana some thirteen years before. It is remarked  by Apastamba as go-dana, the gift of a cow, ostensibly to the guru. It is also  known as kesanta, reserved for later beard growth well after completion of  the majority of samskara. In addition to the sama-vartana “return” from  Veda studies and consummation of the marriage this rite marks the pas sage from childhood to adulthood, the monstrous Scylla and Charybdis of  childhood diseases and child-snatching demons having been successfully  navigated. Again, the number sixteen, as in the ideal number of samskara recalls the importance of the soma tradition in this gradual perfecting of a  given life-body. It is apparent that most life-cycle rites are concerned with  the vulnerable period from conception to that more secure teen age since  the only one remaining is the final rite of passage, antyesti, cremation after  death, the “last sacrifice” being that of a used body. In the tradition of the  endless sacrifice, that final samskara is also the first one for a new body, resi dence of a new embryo. 

Hiranyakesin, Baudhayana, and other Grhya Sutras supply additional  details and the patni are always forthcoming with regard to local customs,  but it is Apastamba who covers almost the full spectrum of traditional rites of  passage. Birthdays, not considered samskara, are also celebrated. Karttikeya,  great-grandson of Duvvuri Yajulu, was feted in 2005 in the home of his grand 

father, Surya Prakasa Avadhani, by his father, Sita Ram Sastry, and mother,  Syamala, in a gathering of some forty Veda pandits and family members  including Gullapalli relatives from Iragavaram. Blessings were recited in  ghana, and a birthday cake with pink frosting honored his first birthday. 

In sum, samskara, each requiring the domestic fire, sprinklings of water, a  declaration of intent (samkalpa), and an auspicious constellation (naksatra) for  proper timing, are believed to construct gradually a true and worthy person,  one refined, perfected, and purified by the full sequence of rituals. Duvvuri  Yajulu noted that “it is not possible to expect an integrated character from  those who neglect proper performance of samskara” and he lamented the  modern reduction of rites of passage in both number and duration.13176 vedic voices 
