+++
title = "4 Livelihood"

+++

Long walks on rain-drenched roads from Nedunuru to Vyaghresvaram allow  the traveler to see the ways the local folk make their living. Coffee-colored  mud trying with every step to suck chappals from feet, bursts of showers send ing rivulets into shoulder ponds, jade leaves of tapioca gleaming in sporadic  sunlight, scenes heightened every few hundred meters by vistas of a score of  women bent over rice transplants, their brilliant red, yellow, and blue saris  shouting over the passionate green of the fields. Well ahead is the harvest sea son when lines of men will move at a steady trot, balancing loads of this paddy  on their heads, aiming for a far corner of the field where bullock carts wait for  the next load. Never a tractor in any of these expanses. This tropical hike in  part follows the same track as Lanka half a century ago trudging to and from  his Veda lesson of the day. The village of Mukkamalla bustles. A woman at the  well filling her brass lota douses all her neighbors within a hundred meters  with salty invectives. A boy of perhaps nine years swings a massive hammer  onto the glowing ruby iron on his father’s anvil. He will do this every day for  another fifty years, performing his duty, in the parlance of the Gita, even as  another nine-year-old acts according to his dharma by reciting back the fourth  kanda of the Taittiriya Samhita. 

A great yellow Tata truck fills the Sriramapuram lane beside an immense  mound of coconuts from surrounding orchards, reminding an observer that  the learning of Veda and performing of offerings are not the only activities  here in the agrahara. Sweating brown men in skimpy loincloths punch the  heavy nuts onto sharp spears standing upright in the ground as others collect  milk and meat or strip husks to load the truck for sale in Hyderabad. Coir will  soon be turned into doormats for American, European, and other markets.  As mentioned before, a tongue-in-cheek Telugu proverb ranks a coconut tree  as more reliable than a son. The coconut haul, like the great stacks of paddy  in burlap bags at the time of the two rice harvests, affirms the agrahara as a  productive segment of one of India’s choicest agricultural zones. 

Economic aspects of Vedic life are not favorite topics of discussion for pan dits although many will point to financial insecurity when attempting to explain  the disappearance of agni-hotrin and extended sacrifices from Konasima. Most  give credit to the TTD parayana scheme and affirm the honoraria, pension  plans, and other subsidies that enable pandits to teach their sons and others,  maintaining the Taittiriya texts despite a declining ritual tradition. The transi tion to a cash economy in the late twentieth century was overwhelming to a  number of families. Samavedam, as noted in Chapter 3, was a good illustra tion of the dilemma, attempting to teach sons and grandsons while feeding 

Becoming a Householder 177 

and clothing an extended family, trying to reconcile two demands, adhyapana at home and paid recitations away from the agrahara. 

The founding of two Brahman agrahara, Sriramapuram in 1955 by the  Dokka family and Kamesvari in 1960 by Nedunuri Srirama Murti, occurred  with the generous notion of providing subsistence to qualified pandits, many  of them entirely devoted to Veda and srauta. The dana for each pandit selected,  eventually fourteen in Sriramapuram and five in Kamesvari, included a half  or full acre of agricultural land with a respectable yield, a house site, and Rs.  1,000 for construction of a new house. The disposition of land, a valuable  possession in an agricultural region, had different histories over the genera tions as each family grew, divided, traded, sold, and experimented with crops.  All the pandits either rented out their acreage for others to work for a por 

tion of the yield or became “gentlemen farmers” who supervised kuli labor ers from the abundant supply of low-caste families in the area. According to  varnasrama-dharma, the laws of class and stage of life, a Brahman may not  directly cultivate the land. 

Some pandits have been more intensely engaged in agriculture than oth ers. Lanka and Baballa were both true hands-on farmers who monitored every  crop through its seasonal changes. Lanka inherited six and a half acres from his  father and could see all of it from his study, expecting the fine yield of twenty  bags of paddy per acre each harvest as well as robust production from coconut  palms. As a boy he watched his father manage the local S.C. (Scheduled Caste)  labor crews from dawn to dusk regulating irrigation ditches, then plowing  and harrowing with bullocks tugging carved wooden plows, then seeding and  transplanting by teams of women, then harvesting, winnowing, and bagging  with additional migrant labor. When he took charge he imitated Baballa by  turning crop fields into office space where he could teach students, consult  with colleagues, counsel folk who came unannounced to the local sage for  advice, watch over the laborers and negotiate prices with merchants. The  half-acre of land that came with the original donation he turned over to a ten 

ant farmer who paid with either paddy or cash. Intercropping of cocoa plants,  tapioca, or gherkin cucumbers between coconut palms was one experimental  technique, as were additional crops such as green grams, mangoes, sugar cane, and tobacco. Fear of drought, so prevalent inland in Telangana, is sel dom in mind for those in water-rich Konasima. In fact, local Veda pandits  are sometimes recruited to cure drought-stricken areas. A visit to Tirupati on  November 17, 1980, revealed among the sixteen pandits praising the gods in a  Varuna-puja several pandits included in this study. 

Veda pandits in general have strong attachment to and concern for the  land and its produce. Duvvuri Yajulu spoke of ksema, the peace, security, and 

[[178]]

welfare of the land (desa), and Lanka had intense respect for the traditions  of landholding, refusing to turn to the new hybrid seeds that were claiming  responsibility for India’s green revolution. “That seed is not native but for eign,” he objected. He used bovine manure only and cited Dharma Sastras  that confirmed his view that synthetic pesticides and chemical fertilizers  damage the soil and produce unhealthy food. A buffalo or cow gave milk for  

agni-hotra and the family, any excess not to be sold but to be given to others. If one follows agricultural reports on production in Konasima, Lanka’s  organic farming principles may have cost him considerable rupees. Despite  his farm income and the minor earnings in honoraria for rtvij service and  examiner’s fees he stated with equanimity that he had been in debt his entire  life. Not long after his death Anasuya complained about the oppressive dabbu (money) culture of modern India and the distasteful necessity of soliciting  rupees for sacrifices. That, she explained, is the reason we did not perform  them ourselves after agni-stoma. 

After years of working his land Baballa sold it when he was crowded out  by squatters. Samavedam, perhaps the shrewdest Veda pandit when it came  to finances, also sold his plot in order to buy a smaller one with a better yield  from a tenant farmer. He reported that he had to pay Rs. 43,000 for the mar 

riages of his first and second daughters and had to scour much of the east  coast picking up honoraria for recitations, a practice his sons continue today.  Bulusu Cayanulu first sold his inherited lands and then the agrahara donation  to pay the marriage expenses of a daughter, after that struggling to remain  within the budget of a TTD salary and occasional sabha honoraria. Duvvuri  Yajulu was the last of the Sriramapuram Veda pandits to keep his original  acre. His third son, Surya Prakasa Avadhani, has been fortunate in living in  a splendid agrahara-like compound in the town of Rajahmundry, rent-free  as long as he teaches Veda. He and other middle-aged pandits such as the  two Kapilavayi brothers and the five Gullapalli brothers, each of these seven  living in a substantial modern house, have ever known the penury of their  elders. The Kapilavayi brothers entered TTD salaried employment early in  their careers and can look forward to pensions when they retire from temple  service. Fulfillment of ahitagni and patni aspirations appears to be imminent  for Rama Sastri and Maruti. 

The agrayana harvest sacrifice, to be considered more carefully in Chapter  6, is the most important obligatory ritual for ahitagni beyond agni-hotra and  lunar isti. Until recent years it was also an annual domestic ritual for many  Brahmans with only a single fire. So significant is agrayana that many strug 

gling with the incapacities of old age make special efforts to complete it every  year either on new- or full-moon days of Asviyuja or Karttika in the autumn, 

Becoming a Householder 179 

or Phalguna in the spring, rekindling lapsed fires just for this. Baballa and  Sundari, for example, continued until he was eighty-seven, in a special sala constructed in front of the house. Blind Duvvuri Yajulu, the effervescent  granddaughters of Baballa-- Rekha, Madhuri, and Kalyani-- giggling furiously  around him, declared that 80 percent of the benefits go to the community and  insisted on performance of agrayana to the end. No one may eat the new rice  until it is offered in a rite that takes two or three hours, and of course no one  may eat rice at any time without being in a state of ritual purity. The connec 

tions between the land, the people, and food are always palpable. As noted in the second section of Chapter 2 the entry into pandits’ lives  and fortunes of the Tirupati-Tirumalai Devasthanam (TTD) and the Andhra  Pradesh Charitable and Hindu Religious Institutions and Endowments  Acts made all the difference for the recent generations. The officers of the  temple famous for its wealth channeled funds for decades into promoting  “Vedic culture” through salaries, pensions, and honoraria to Veda pandits  for special or daily recitations (parayana) or, more recently, for their publica tions and other accomplishments. As noted earlier, opinions of the overall  impact of these programs has been mixed. Some see a waning Vedic tradi tion saved by temple and government largesse, and point to historic sup port for Veda pandits mentioned in sthala-purana and inscriptions such as  the Simhacalam temple appropriation from its treasury for Veda adhyaya dated 1383.14 Many Andhra pandits signed on to the recitation schedule.  Samavedam, for example, the most eager participant, started at age thirty  and remained until he died. Duvvuri Yajulu, Cayanulu, and Mitranarayana  received the higher ahitagni salaries and served until incapacities became  restrictive and they accepted pensions. For them it was a worthwhile pro gram. And without doubt the TTD also succeeded at inserting Vedic tradi tion into popular culture. Cassette recorded recitations are heard on local  bathing ghats and every important temple in Andhra dramatizes one to four  different Vedas being recited live. 

On the other hand, the TTD is blamed by some for interfering with tradi tions regarded as reclusive, virtually secretive, away from public scrutiny and  institutional control. Baballa and Lanka were among those who rejected offers  to become, as they saw it, “employees” of the TTD who descend into “selling”  the Veda in exchange for a steady income. They also worried about invita tions to young pandits from Hindu temples in New York, Chicago, Pittsburgh,  Atlanta, Houston, and other American cities. “Only in the isolation of an agra hara,” elders said, “away from worldly distractions, can an ahitagni survive.  Our young men will go there and not return and that will mean the destruc tion of srauta as well as the teaching of Veda here.”

[[180]]
