+++
title = "5 Old Age, Retirement, and Thoughts on Renunciation"

+++

In his green-canopied house under beckoning palms in Nedunuru Lanka  was asked how he was feeling. “Jirna!” he replied, summoning the Telugu  and Sanskrit word for digestion. Never a complainer, he was not indicating  stomach or bowel problems but a larger, insoluble one. “I am being digested  by Time” was his message. When he used the familiar metaphor of food for  the untreatable process of aging he might have been reflecting the Taittiriya  Upanisad refrain he learned about the age of ten: aham annam, aham annam,  “I am food, I am food!”15 As noted in Chapter 3, Lanka announced that he  would die at age seventy-two because that was his father’s age at death in 1947.  Also, a mrtyu-cakra, death chart, prepared for him by an astrologer, indicated  severe negative effects from the planet Rahu. But what seemed like Rahu’s  fatal illness was countermanded by Atharva Veda mantras that he knew by  heart. Medicine prescribed for his diabetic condition might have had some thing to do with a return to health. Two years later he and Anasuya discontin 

ued agni-hotra, a cessation permitted by Apastamba after thirty years of daily  performance. In 1988 a kinder death chart predicted that he would live to  be eighty and indeed he celebrated sahasra-candana darsana, his sight of a  thousand full moons. At eighty-three he enjoyed taking on a new student and  commented: “Death is inevitable but the will to live is strong.” The satisfac 

tion of living on was replaced by suffering at eighty-six, however, with paraly sis, inability to walk or feed himself, slurred speech, and dimming eyesight.  “There is no more necessity for existence. There are some remaining days,  that’s all we have,” and he died at age eighty-seven in June 1999, fifteen years  beyond the first astrological predictive reading. 

Anasuya, married to Lanka for seventy-seven years and with eight surviv ing children, died on the last day of 2005. Her age of ninety was unmatched  by anyone in her lineage. A woman of advanced age owns increased prestige  in the agrahara or village and Anasuya fit the description by Duvvury (n. 9) of  the fully auspicious married female, the “ultimate goal of every woman.” 

Duvvuri Yajulu and Baballa, next-door neighbors in Sriramapuram, also  became nonagenarians like Anasuya. They were ninety-four on the Indian  calendar by which they reckoned. As indicated in the capsule biographies  of Chapter 3 the Konasima pandits and wives have an enviable longevity  record. Laksminarayana, the youngest ahitagni to die, did not quite reach  his eightieth birthday. Kamesvara and Mitranarayana, both in their eighties,  ceased agni-hotra but continued to teach, Smarta manuals for the former,  Taittiriya Samhita for ten- to twelve-year-old students for Mitranarayana, who 

Becoming a Householder 181 

followed the tradition of his father before him, teaching Veda fifty years or  more after agni-stoma. In sum, the average age at death for ahitagni in this  survey of the close-knit complex of Vyaghresvaram village and the agrahara of  Sriramapuram and Nedunuru was eighty-six and a half years.16 

“Retirement” is therefore a qualified term for Veda pandits who may leave  TTD parayana service but continue to teach Veda and other subjects as long as  they have voice and stamina. Becoming a wilderness wanderer in vana-prastha,  the third asrama between householder and world renouncer, is sometimes the  traditional recommendation when a man finds gray in his hair and his sons  have sons.17 But such withdrawal from agrahara or village is seldom a choice  for pandits who live on and die in their homes, not the forest. And retirement  now has an entirely new face since the advent of TTD, state, and central gov ernment honoraria and pension funds for Veda pandits, with special consider 

ations for ahitagni. The Veda pandit family suddenly became like the families  of those employed by the State Bank of India or the Indian Railways, free from  financial distress or dependence on largesse from children and grandchildren,  with a check arriving on schedule monthly. The security derived from a reli 

able pension is inestimable. 

The Vedic ritual life, on the other hand, is subject to retirement and may  be abbreviated or curtailed when senescence begins to limit mobility. ApSS  3.14.12 suggests thirty years as a possible minimum for the performance of  agni-hotra, an honest recognition of what is generally called “body weakness,”  afflictions magnified by age. Joints are distressed from constant rising, sitting  cross-legged, rising again, not to mention smoke-filled eyes and, worst of all,  failing memories of mantras and kriya. Remaining “madi-tied” to rules of purity  and pollution when reciting or offering also may exact a toll, the necessity of  bathing, for example, particularly in the chill of December and January waters,  loading fevers and colds on the aged. Extended sacrifices are fatiguing and older  pandits accept fewer guest-priest roles when offered. In a forty-day paundarika,  for example, there is no beverage or cooked food, nothing until late-afternoon  phala-hara snacks of fruits, nuts, and cold leftovers. During a sacrifice a rtvij is  permitted a rice-and-curds meal cooked on either the garha-patya or daksinagni fires but often this is declined in the busy-ness of the event and the general  desire to prevail in traditional pandit opika, endurance. Read machismo here. 

When it came time to diminish their daily routine, blind Duvvuri Yajulu,  with an increasingly frail wife Surya, explained that agni-hotra can be performed  in two ways, one with kriya, the other with mantra, and it was the former, the  actions, they were compelled to abandon. “We now perform with mantra recita 

tions, allowed for those in old age with physical handicaps.” Parayana in the  small agrahara temple only a few steps from his house was done for two decades 

[[182]]

until he retired at age seventy in 1985. Samavedam was only thirty when he  signed on for TTD recitation in 1963 and served for the rest of his days, Cayanulu  participated until pensioned in 1993, and Mitranarayana, who enrolled at age  forty-nine in 1979, remained active until he was almost eighty. The ahitagni 

recited in local temples with a higher salary than other Vedic Brahmans. In a marriage ceremony the boy (never the girl) is ritually presented with  a mendicant’s staff and offered a choice: Kasi-yatra, running away to Varanasi  to become a renouncer, or proceeding to tie the knot with his parent-chosen  bride. Invariably, the life of samnyasa being as remote to a twelve-year-old as  the dark side of the moon, he goes on with the ceremony at hand as the lesser  evil. The ideal of the renouncer’s mode and its power, however, remains vivid  in the Vedic community of elders. Ascetics, in the eyes of Veda pandits, are  supernumeraries, perhaps because Apastamba, particularly in the Dharma  Sutra, pays close attention to them.18 In the general population an ambiva lent evaluation of sadhus and other ascetics prevails.19 On one hand they are  suspect, thought to be fakers, not fakirs, sluggards who have copped out of  real-world effort. On the other hand, they are marvel workers worthy of atten tion. Balayogi of Mummidivaram, east of Nedunuru on the Gautami branch  of the Godavari, was an ascetic who was believed to eat only one day a year, on  Siva-ratri, the all-night worship of Siva. After he died in 1985 his foster brother,  “Little” Balayogi, acquired similar fame. Even a decade after his death in 1992  crowds were so immense that special buses, police patrols, and water supplies  still came to Mummidivaram in the heart of Veda pandit land. These pandits claim to be unimpressed by the Balayogi pair and similar  pop yogis but they all have their own ascetic narratives to tell. Floating in a  high echelon above all other Brahmans, the Veda pandits seem suddenly to  size themselves down in the company of renouncers who have exchanged  worldly life for a lifetime of wandering village to village, sleeping wherever  possible, eating whatever food is offered, serving as illustrations of a life-stage  beyond householder. A few may have bizarre outfits, such as one who came  for alms from the dora wearing around his neck a bright yellow plastic Donald  Duck. But vairagya, disgust with worldly desires, is treated with utmost seri ousness as a vow, in the words of the Kapilavayi brothers, “requiring courage,  extremely difficult to uphold.” Baballa pointed with pride to his mula-purusa,  root ancestor, Bhamidipati Brahmibuta Acarya, who became a samnyasin after  producing sons to initiate five generations of soma sacrificers. Sathya Sai Baba, who died at eighty-four in April 2011, served up a good  case for a renouncing figure of widespread appeal. A Sudra, a lowly rank to the  high-born Vaidikas and presumably one not to be touched, he was nevertheless  widely accepted as “guru” for his charitable works and his famed “presence.” 

Becoming a Householder 183 

Beyond that, he was a target of devotion as a deity become human. His seventi eth birthday celebration on November 23, 1995, was much the topic of conver sation in Konasima that autumn and Duvvuri Sarvesvara, Bulusu Cayanulu,  Samavedam, and others provided effusive descriptions of their invited week in  Puttaparti in southern Andhra, not forgetting emoluments for lending Veda to  the party. “I had not seen him before,” said a beaming Cayanulu. “For seven  days I  recited Veda in his presence. That was wonderful! I  was given new  clothes, Rs. 5,000, Rs. 1,000 for travel, and my wife (Subbalaksmi) received  a new sari, gold bangles, a pressure cooker. Until I  went to see him I  was  feeling weakness but I recited with great ease. My daughters pointed out that  all this was due to his blessings, because I had darsan of him.” Lanka’s son,  Annapurna Sastri, knowing that Sathya Sai Baba had dramatically cured him self in 1963 of a disease described by devotees as either tubercular meningitis  or stroke, went to his free hospital for heart bypass surgery. At his death the  

Sathya Sai Baba Trust was reported to be worth at least $8.9 billion. Mitranarayana also talks about Puttaparti but without obsequious tones.  “Sathya Sai Baba offered me Rs. 40,000 to sponsor a yajna. I asked about the  animal sacrifice that is dictated by Veda and Baba accepted on the grounds of  those Vedic sanctions. But I thought what if we are in the midst of the sacri fice and he dismisses us with full fee. We would be committing the sin of an  incomplete sacrifice. How many other yajna would I have to perform as com pensation?” Mitranarayana did not trust the famous saint to keep his word and  therefore excused himself. 

Equally unimpressed was Lanka, who had absolutely nothing to report  about the sudden visit of the entourage of the senior Acarya of the Kamakoti  Pitha, Jayendra Sarasvati Swami, to his tiny, remote house beyond Nedunuru.  It was a manifestation that struck Duvvuri Yajulu with wonder, as if the swami  were the Maharaja or a new incarnation of Siva. Lanka did, however, wonder  if he should offer food to this Jagadguru Sankaracarya who, contra Balayogi,  probably ate on most days of the year. 

In the final analysis, Konasima pandits appear to follow Manu in under standing moksa as “a synonym of renunciation,”20 virtually the Niebuhrian  relevance of an impossible ideal with no immediate reward. Renunciation and  liberation are there as supposition for the next time around, a future rebirth.  As for ista-purta, which Kane tidily defines as “the cumulative spiritual result  of merit due to . . . performance of sacrificial and charitable acts,”21 Duvvuri  Yajulu summed it up: “Merely for doing sacrifices, janma-rahita, absence of  rebirths, will not occur. Performing a karma does not bring freedom from  rebirth. Those samnyasin who renounce everything . . . they alone are eligible  for janma-rahita.”

[[184]]

Another elder in Konasima found a metaphor to describe svarga loka, the  heaven promised to the performer of a rite such as the vaja-peya in which the  sacrificer climbs a ladder placed against the sacrificial post and proclaims on  behalf of his wife and himself together: “We have reached heaven, we have  become immortal.” What does this mean? “It is like a summer resort,” he  offered. “A tourist can have a good time as long as his purse is full but when  the money is gone he has to return home.” Brian Smith also noted this tem 

porary character of svarga loka: “The ritual journey to heaven taken by human  sacrificers . . . must be a round trip.”22 The contradictions of an exalted sta tus as lifelong sacrificers, yet householders short of renunciation render the  co-sacrificers model enigmas, those who, in Jan Heesterman’s words, “should  encompass the world and at the same time keep out of it.”23 
