+++
title = "03 Civilization and Society"

+++





### Absence of Caste in the Vedas

The Vedas depict a small civilization, beginning to settle on Indic soil. The small groups of which it consisted kept their Indo-European language, together with its poetic techniques, mythologies, the cults of fire and Soma and the knowledge of horses and chariots. That latter knowledge had been carried along with language across the mountain barriers that separate Central Asia from the Indic subcontinent. It was carried not by hordes of invaders, but in the minds of small groups of men who established alliances with local women. Language and ritual were transmitted from father to son. Fathers insisted that sons learned Vedic until transmission became ritualized \(as illustrated by the Gāyatrī mantra at the end of Chapter 11\). We hear little about the mother or the institution of marriage until the end of the Rigveda. Women came from many sections of the indigenous population and spoke various languages. They may have been ‘widely extending’ nymphs like Urvaśī, but at first they did not know Vedic and rarely, or ever, composed Vedas. Though matriarchal and matrilineal clans and tribes must have existed, it is not obvious that the general Indic pattern of dependence of women on men was in existence also. That pattern was formulated explicitly in post-Vedic times by the code of Manu or *Manu Sm*ṛ*ti* of the second century CE: as a child, a girl must remain under her father’s control, as a woman, under her husband, and when her husband is dead, under the sons. None of these restrictions may have existed or imply that a caste system existed in the Vedas.

That the indigenous population contributed substantially to the Vedas follows from the fact that the names of indigenous families, clans and tribes, became the names of Vedic *schools* \(*śākhā*\). Those subdivisions are the social units into which the Vedas came to be divided. There is not much of a hierarchy between them apart from the widely accepted fact that the Rigveda comes first. These units had no chieftains, not to mention bishops; but there were experts \(*brāhma*ṇ*a*s\) of the language \(*bráhman*\) who included members of indigenous groups that had started using Vedic as a second, third or another language. Thus arose a vast edifice with undefined boundaries because it depended on ritual and other specialists with independent origins and independent minds. It was canonized only later as described at the end of the next chapter and depicted in Table 1.

Until we reach the latest stages, there is no evidence for any kind of caste system in the Vedas. It begins to be visible in late Vedic works and the post-Vedic *Dharma Sūtra*s. And is fully developed as a theory in the law book of Manu.

The hypothesis of caste being a Vedic institution is based upon the idea of invading hordes of Aryans who conquered indigenous lineages. There were no such invading hordes as we have seen. We know that nomadic or semi-nomadic tribes were looking for booty but that was not confined to speakers of Vedic. Nor is there evidence for ‘free Aryans and subjugated indigenous people’, the kind of phrase still used by modern historians of India such as Kulke and Rothermund. The genetic picture assigned both tribal and caste populations to indigenous lineages going back some 9,000 years. I do not know how much light DNA can shed on these matters, but that picture does not contradict anything we have gathered so far. Part I showed that they were no more than the adventures of nomadic pastoralists on the way to India and beginning to settle there.

To sum up this brief introduction: the interactions of a handful of Vedic speakers with indigenous groups, themselves speaking many languages and of great diversity in so far as we can reconstruct them, could not possibly have led to anything grand like a ‘new social system’. Post-Vedic India was and still is obsessed with caste and continues to attribute that idea to the Vedic Indians, whether they were regarded as scapegoats or as its semi-divine originators. But do the Vedas not use terms such as *brahman*, *k*ṣ*atram* and *viś*? They do and it has been the cause of great confusion. The mistake of the large majority of writers has been to imagine that these terms refer to the names of the later castes, *brāhma*ṇ*a*, *k*ṣ*atriya* and *vaiśya*. What do the Vedas themselves say?



### Vedic Evidence and Scholarly Discussions

Three lines of an early Rigvedic invocation of the Aśvins, divine twins who travel through space in their horse-drawn chariot, provide a picture of early Vedic civilization in a nutshell. In so doing, they make use of three of the four terms that underlie the later social system:
>
> ‘Promote the *bráhman* and promote poetic inspirations. Slay the demons, drive away pain and illness. Drink the pressed Soma in harmony with Sun and Dawn, o Aśvins\!

> ‘Promote the *k*ṣ*atram* and promote able-bodied men. Slay the demons, drive away pain and illness. Drink the pressed Soma in harmony with Sun and Dawn, o Aśvins\!

> ‘Promote cows and promote the *viś*. Slay the demons, drive away pain and illness. Drink the pressed Soma in harmony with Sun and Dawn, o Aśvins\!’ \(RV 8.35\).

We meet here with three basic concepts:
>
> *bráhman* or ‘language’, later connected with *brahmán*, ‘learned man’ or ‘priest’ \(note the accent difference\); *k*ṣ*atram* which means ‘power’ or ‘dominion’;

> *viś* which refers to ‘the people’ in the sense of those who are settled on the soil. It may also refer to milk bearing cows.

Sometimes we come across passages that evoke a united front of *brahma-k*ṣ*atram*. It refers to alliances between priests and chieftains directed against *viś*. It is likely that *viś* refers to indigenous groups that were sedentary. The three terms also occur in later prose compositions of the Yajurveda such as the Brāhmaṇas but it proves nothing: for we shall see that there is little that the composers of these works do *not* say. These same compositions mention the derived terms *brāhma*ṇ*a*, *k*ṣ*atriya* and *vaiśya*, which later will refer to the three highest castes, but there is no fixed hierarchy among them and it sometimes looks as if order does not matter at all. An example from a Yajurveda Brāhmaṇa: ‘The seers of yore say that the *vaiśya* is born of the Rigveda, the *k*ṣ*atriya* of the Yajurveda, the *brahmán* of the Sāmaveda.’ A composition in prose from the Sāmaveda mentions three boys who were reared by hyenas. Each was given a boon and they chose, in order of seniority, *k*ṣ*atram*, *bráhman* and *viś*. When hierarchies display so much variation, even if it is due to hyenas, the only thing that remains is the number three.

Composers of the Vedas are fascinated by many numbers, but three is the number they seem to like best. It is the one uncontroversial feature of the vision defended, half a century ago, by Georges Dumézil. He believed in a grand Indo-European tripartite scheme of *fonctions*, as he called them. They apply to many things, including deities and social classes, not only among ancient Indians but among Iranians, Celts, Greeks, Romans and others. The French word *fonction* is even vaguer than its English cognate *function*. It means, apart from ‘function’, also ‘post’, ‘office’ or ‘occupation’.

Dumézil’s ideas continue to be widely discussed, especially by religious scholars and students of religion in the United States and France. Dumézil started with the Iranian, but its society is different from the ancient Indian. Vedic society itself is much more complex than the simplistic triads of Dumézil suggests. I shall not try to summarize the extensive discussions that have followed but make an exception for the critique of John Brough, which is not only thorough and authoritative, but also entertaining. He has shown that Dumézil’s arguments apply equally well to the Hebrew monotheism of the Old Testament as to Indo-European mythology.

The alleged specificity of the three *fonctions* is applicable to Biblical monotheism because any divinity has various aspects. In the Rigveda, Varuṇa is an ancient and ambiguous deity on whose nature scholarly opinions vary. Dumézil stresses his wrathful features though he is sometimes willing to ‘untie’ the sins committed by his worshippers. Twelve invocations of the Rigveda, out of over a thousand, are addressed to Varuṇa and twenty-three to a dual-divinity called Mitra–Varuṇa, in which Mitra is not only, as his name indicates, a friend but also a personification of contract, another meaning of the word. According to Dumézil, Varuṇa and Mitra–Varuṇa exemplify the Brahman class.

Brough shows that Dumézil’s argument equally applies to the jealous god of the penitential psalms of the Old Testament, who is, like Mitra, the god of a covenant. The Hebrew god is also mighty in battle, which is the *k*ṣ*atriya*’s domain. He furthermore ‘causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth’ \(Psalm 104.14\). It sounds like a translation of a Vedic phrase on *viś* which refers to the life of farmers after which the *vaiśyas* were named.

The small number of invocations of Varuṇa and Mitra represents a cult that is more ancient than the cult of Indra which pervades the entire Rigveda. According to R.N. Dandekar, Varuṇa was a deity of the early Indo-Aryans of Bactria. I have used this cult with its puzzling features because it is relatively small and manageable. Brough’s chief arguments are concerned with Indra, but they are extensive and detailed and I cannot pursue them here. Brough concludes that the three *fonctions* are so elastic—and therefore useless—that ‘any sufficiently extensive and diversified body of literature might be expected to produce significantly comparable results.’

None of these savants pay attention, and for good reasons, to another Vedic poem that is invariably quoted in general books about India to make a point about the caste system. I am referring to the ‘Hymn to Puruṣa’ \(RV 10.90\). Puruṣa is a primordial male and the poem assigns the terms *brahmán, rājanya, vaiśya* and *śūdra* to his mouth, arms, thighs and feet. Brahmán does not refer to caste but to a learned man or priest \(see above *Three: Civilization and Society*\). The place of the term *k*ṣ*atriya* is taken by *rājanya*, which refers to a person of princely status. There are factual and analytical anomalies about this poem. The first are that it is the only place in the Rigveda where the late term *śūdra*, and therefore a four-instead of a threefold division of social classes occurs. The analytical anomaly is: why should this poem support the idea of the later caste system, when its main point is to describe how that primordial male was dismembered and killed? Does it imply that castes are dismembered limbs and therefore dead?

The Puruṣa myth looks like a late addition to the Rigveda. It does not resemble any other Rigvedic myth and is not in accordance with any other Vedic reference to social distinctions. The only common features are negative. Puruṣa recurs in later Vedic compositions and still later, and in a different sense, in the philosophical system of the *Sā*ṃ*khya*. That system has ancient roots but is concerned with enumerations and lacks structure. As for the term *jāti*, which long after the Vedas began to refer to caste by birth and applied, in due course, to hundreds of castes and sub-castes, the word is not common in Vedic and only used for ‘birth’. We have seen about birth that the status of a person, who is about to be born from an inter-tribal alliance, may depend on complex rules that vary from tribe to tribe.

Last but not the least, Vedic has no general term for social class such as the later word *var*ṇ*a*, which, in the Veda, exists but refers to ‘colour’, ‘outward appearance’ and especially ‘form’. In the epic, it means ‘caste’ but to attribute any such meaning to the Vedas is anachronistic.



### Varying Terminologies and the first ‘Vedic Villages’

The mere occurrence of terms such as *brāhma*ṇ*a*s or ‘brahmans’ proves nothing about caste or caste distinctions. The Rigveda speaks of them often, but the term refers to various kinds of learned people, including ‘sages’, ‘poets’ and ‘priests’. The term *k*ṣ*atriya* has no settled meaning either, neither in the Rigveda, nor in later Vedic compositions. The Taittirīya Saṃhitā of the Black Yajurveda mentions *k*ṣ*at*ṛ which is a chamberlain or doorkeeper. The Tāṇḍya Brāhmaṇa of the Sāmaveda refers to ‘eight brave persons that hold up the kingdom’. The list ends with *k*ṣ*at*ṛ and *sa*ṃ*grahīt*ṛ. According to P.V. Kane, they are the names of high officers of some sort. Similar observations could be made with regard to other names that became caste names in the later hierarchy. But the chief difficulty is not that we would get entangled in a fruitless and abstract discussion of social systems. What we have to know first is who were the speakers of Vedic and the composers of the Vedas. We know that composing Vedas took place almost entirely within the continent, and that the Vedic language was a branch of Indo-Iranian that had come into existence a little earlier and further to the north. Those earlier peoples may have composed ‘Vedas’, but they are at best the precursors of the Vedas as we know them. The latter were composed by descendants of those precursors, as well as others and a variety of intermediaries as we have seen.

The alliances we have discussed include battles and one of these is mentioned specifically in the Rigveda: the Battle of Ten Kings who were, obviously, tribal chieftains. According to the Rigveda, the battle was won by the Bharatas. Their victory was due to the mantra power of their priest whose name was Vasiṣṭha, the ‘Most Excellent’ sage whose aristocratic pedigree connected him with Dawn \(*One: Geography of the Vedas and Their Language*\) and who is associated with the seventh circle of the Rigveda. The Bharatas, who gave their name to what is also called ‘India’, settled eventually on the banks of the Yamunā river.

‘Settling’ means settling with cattle, animal husbandry and increasing wealth. Cows were as important as horses, but horses remained rare and only the number of cows plays a role as a measure of wealth \(*Seven: Yajurveda* \). The development of Vedic terminology reflects other changes, such as the gradual replacement of the barley cultivation of Early Vedic pastoralism by the agriculture of rice. Civilization and society became gradually village-based.

Three stages of this process may be distinguished with the help of the semantic development of the term *grāma* as Wilhelm Rau has shown. In the Rigveda, it denoted a train of herdsmen, roaming about with cattle, ox-carts and chariots in quest of fresh pastures and booty. Subsequently, it came to refer to a temporary camp for such a train, made of bamboo poles and reed mats that could be quickly assembled. Towards the end of the Vedic period, *grāma* began to mean ‘village’. It continues to be used in that sense to the present day.

Concepts of civilization that seem to be ‘Vedic’ are more difficult to capture. I use ‘civilization’ rather than ‘society’ \(which is too narrow\) or ‘religion’ \(which is seriously misleading\) but all are very imprecise concepts. Features of civilization vary not only in different Vedas, but in different compositions within each Veda. We shall pay attention to more specific and useful concepts such as mantra, chant, knowledge, meditation and language, *brahman* and *brāhma*ṇ*a*. Each of them has its own history. We cannot pursue these exercises in semantic history but it is difficult to make a meaningful generalization that goes beyond them unless we are happy with bland statements such as: the Vedic period was a period of dynamic change in civilization and society both.



### Rathakāra and a Note on Women

From what we have mentioned in Part I about the great prestige of experts who knew how to train horses or construct chariots with wheels with spokes—both specialized tasks that reflect a high level of technology—we would expect them to occupy an important, or at least a special place in early Vedic society. They might be assigned to a high caste had the notion of caste then existed. Would the chariot-maker give us an idea of Vedic society *before* the caste system? It should not be difficult to find information about this since there is a common term that refers to that chariot-maker: *rathakāra.*

The term *rathakāra* does not occur in the Rigveda. There is no other specialized term that refers to a professional who constructs a *ratha*. Does the term just happen to be absent, or is the Rigveda more concerned with the imagery and symbolic significance of the chariot? These questions are difficult or impossible to answer, but late explicitness of a term proves little. In the long poem about the battle of the ten chieftains \(Rigveda 7.18\), the term *ratha* does not occur. But there exists a technical terminology for many parts of chariots in the Vedas and especially in the Rigveda. They include terms for its various beams, axle, side-pieces, interior, seat, yoke, etc., and especially for the parts of its wheels: axle-pin, nave, felloe, spokes, etc. \(*Two: Archaeology and the Oral Tradition*\). There must have been professionals who were able to put these things together and should be referred to as ‘chariot makers’.

The term *rathakāra*, which becomes prominent later, is more interesting and puzzling than one might expect. I begin again with P.V. Kane who has some significant information, primarily from post-Vedic sources. I quote him *verbatim* \(*History of Dharmaśāstra*, Vol. II, Part I, 1930: 45–6\):
>
> The Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa \(I.1.4\) after stating that the *brāhma*ṇ*a* should consecrate sacred fires in the spring, the *k*ṣ*atriya* in summer, the *vaiśya* in autumn, ordains that the *rathakāra* should consecrate sacred fires in the rainy season. The question arises whether the *rathakāra* is a member of the three higher castes who has taken in economic distress to the profession of making chariots or is a person belonging to a caste other than the three higher *var*ṇ*as.* Jaimini in his Pūrva Mīmāṃsā Sūtra \(VI.1.44–50\) discusses this question and establishes that the *rathakāra* is a member of a caste other than the three higher *var*ṇ*as*, that he has on account of the express words in the *śruti* the privilege to consecrate sacred fire with Vedic mantras, that the mantra for the consecration of *rathakāras* is ṛ*bh*ūṇāṃ *tvā* \(*Tai.Br.* I.1.4\) and that the *rathakāras* are the caste called *Saudhanvana* which is neither *śūdra* nor one of the three higher ones, but is slightly inferior to the three higher *var*ṇ*as*. Viśvarūpa \[a commentator on another *dharmaśāstra* work\] notices that in some *sm*ṛ*ti* the *rathakāra*, though not belonging to the three higher *var*ṇ*as*, was allowed the privilege of *upanayana*, but adds that this dictum of the *sm*ṛ*ti* is due to mistake, it being misled by the fact that he is allowed the privilege of *ādhāna* \(consecration of sacred fires\). In modern times, the members of the carpenter caste in certain parts of the Deccan at least are in the habit of performing the *upanayana* and wearing the sacred thread.

Here speaks a lawyer \(Kane was an advocate at the Bombay High Court and a senior advocate at the Federal Court of India\) and an expert on medieval and modern technical Sanskrit texts and treatises on a number of disciplines, including not only law and ritual but also the ritual philosophy of the *Mīmā*ṃ*sā* and the commentatorial literature on all these works. His terminology is replete with post-Vedic concepts, which does not affect the value of his work, but should be kept in mind when we are enquiring into the status of the original *rathakāra*.

Kane refers to many Vedic compositions by name, and I shall do the same in this *rathakāra* section. The reader is requested to chew on these names as if they were tobacco, a practice he or she may regard as refreshing or repulsive. Some will be explained later and I have retained them here only in case someone knows the names already, or wants to refer back to this section after they have become familiar. As for the other terms that Kane uses: *brāhma*ṇ*a*, *k*ṣ*atriya*, *vaiśya* and *var*ṇ*a* do not have their post-Vedic meanings in the Rigveda, and *śūdra* occurs only in the so-called Puruṣa Hymn as we have seen in the section on ‘Absence of Caste in the Vedas’. The terms *śruti* and *sm*ṛ*ti* acquired the specific meanings used here only in the *dharmaśāstra* literature and have lasted until the present day: *śruti* refers to the Veda itself which came to be regarded as a supernatural revelation of non-human origin; and *sm*ṛ*ti* refers to Vedic or post-Vedic sources \(such as the Bhagavad Gītā\), based upon and therefore second in authority to *śruti*. The term *ādhāna* designates the consecration of sacred fires which is a basic feature of Yajurveda ritual; and *upanayana* is the initiation of the student which involves, among other things, investiture with the sacred thread. In sum, Kane’s paragraph is a straightforward expression of the Indic obsession with the caste system of the last two millennia. I am not saying that during that period it was always defended or adhered to, or that Kane himself was advocating it: but it is his frame of reference and is *not* applicable to the Vedas.

Kane’s long sentences combine the style of legal documents and that of the classical Sanskrit treatises and commentaries. The paragraph I quoted belongs to what scholars and students of Indian civilization will continue to regard as Kane’s greatest contribution: the monumental *History of Dharmaśāstra* in five volumes with several more parts, one of the great works of scholarship of the modern world. But his learned paragraph throws light on many more problems than the author is aware of and deserves close reading. So after clearing up the terminological jungle, let us take a brief look at Kane’s sources and what is known of their chronology.

The Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa was composed towards the end of the Vedic period, after 800 BCE, in Pañcāla from where it went south. It is clear from Kane’s quote that it accepted and advocated a system of three castes: the composers were beginning to act as legislators and their acceptance of caste would continue for millennia to come. Whether it was accepted by ‘Vedic society’, which by then had settled in many schools and independent villages, is another question. The most likely answer is that traces of something like it might have existed in some \(like the later Taittirīya compositions\) and remained unknown to many. One matter is clear: the position of the *rathakāra* caused problems for this system wherever it was beginning to raise its ugly head. His status must have been high *before* anything like the system of castes had been thought of. That is what we would expect if the first *rathakāra*s possessed knowledge that came from elsewhere and was new to the Indic subcontinent. Kane can envisage the *rathakāra* only as a village craftsman, not the owner of mysterious insights and technologies that he carries in his mind.

Other scholars have added new information, sometimes illustrating the high position of the *rathakāra*, but they have generally followed Kane’s line. Wilhem Rau tells us that during the Brāhmaṇa period, the *rathakāra* owned palatial residences because during the *aśvamedha* or horse sacrifice, the horse attendants stayed with him and what is more, there were four hundred such attendants according to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. Hertha Krick makes the same mistake as Kane: she is aware of the *rathakāra*’s high status, but assumes that he came from the ‘lowly indigenous people who had been conquered’—a straightforward restatement of the outdated, traditional view. Following a commentary on a Śrauta Sūtra, Gonda believes that ‘this artisan’ was given almost *kśatriya* status because it had become easier to achieve such status in later times.

I conclude that the *rathakāra* occupied a high social status in some Vedic circles long before anything like a ‘caste system’ existed. It doesn’t follow that his ancestors entered South Asia on a chariot, or carried chariots across the mountains, unless it was in their heads \(*manasā*\). All of the section on ‘Carts, Chariots and the Mind’ at the outset of Chapter 2 applies to him and is relevant to our understanding of his position.

The position of women in the Vedas is instructively similar to that of the *rathakāra* in some respects. Different in being subservient to fathers, husbands and sons, women are entitled to be *brahmavādinīs*, ‘speakers of *brahman*,’ which P.V. Kane translates, appropriately vaguely, as referring to ‘sacred lore’. It requires the initiation of *upanayana* and prescribes the wearing of a sacred thread and the keeping of a fire. Later commentators, mystified, explain the wearing of the sacred thread as ‘wearing the upper garment in the manner of the sacred thread’ though the original wording is unambiguous. According to Manu’s post-Vedic book of laws, women are eligible to perform rites but without reciting the accompanying mantras. It makes sense: the ritual use of mantras presupposes that they are already known but there is no tradition for the Vedas to be taught to women.

Having said that much—or little—it bears repeating that we should never look upon ‘The Vedas’ as a unit. Their riches and deficiencies are due to a great variety of people of different backgrounds and origins, living in different regions and interacting during an extended period of time. We shall see in the next section that composing poems in the early Vedic language, making a selection, putting it together and looking upon it as ‘The Rigveda’ took very roughly half a millennium. Something similar holds for two of the other three Vedas though much of their earlier histories are now lost. The only Vedic units to which we are able to assign more definite places of origin and less vague beginnings in time are the schools of the Yajurveda as we shall see.




