+++
title = "08 Atharvaveda"

+++



The Atharvaveda consists in its entirety of poetry and therefore, in the Kuru terminology, of Mantras. It survives in two schools. The earliest is the Paippalāda, called after its teacher Pippalāda whose name is derived from *pippala*, the sacred fig tree, *Ficus religiosa*. Some compositions of this school remind us of the Rigveda, but they are in linguistically younger forms, refer to the Kuru kings and their origins lie in the Kuru region. The second school, Śaunaka, arose a little later and further east in the land of the Pañcālas. It is less similar to the Rigveda. The composer-priests were Āgirasas and Bhārgavas, sometimes excluded from the ‘Three Vedas’ into which they were officially incorporated when the ‘Four Vedas’ were established. All of it combines to show that the Atharvaveda consists of early compositions that developed on their own and were incorporated in the edifice of the Three Vedas to turn it into Four.

We shall see in the next chapter that the main varieties of Vedic ritual are the *g*ṛ*hya* ‘domestic’ ritual and the *śrauta* ritual which is less easy to explain. The Atharvaveda consists chiefly of sorcery invocations \(black and white magic\), speculative or mystical poetry, fragments of *g*ṛ*hya* ‘domestic’ and royal ritual, as well as more specific compositions such as those that are linked to the arts of healing. It was originally excluded from the *śrauta* ritual.

I shall not be able to do full justice to the Atharvaveda, which continues to be a specialized subject within Vedic studies. It illustrates an attractive feature of these studies that deserves to be known by anyone interested in the study of human civilization: it is still possible to make important fresh discoveries in the field of Vedic traditions and open up new avenues of inquiry.

In 1957, Durgamohan Bhattacharyya made an ‘Announcement of a Rare Find’: the discovery among Orissa brahmans of palm-leaf manuscripts of the Paippalāda recension of the Atharvaveda of which parts had been available only in a single and notoriously corrupt manuscript from Kashmir. These were spectacular finds and it took the few people, who were able to make use of them, much time and work to make them accessible to the outside world. Durgamohan published one large volume in 1970 and his son Dipak Bhattacharya another in 1997. In the mean time, others went to Orissa in search of more. They include C.G. Kashikar of Poona, Michael Witzel of Harvard and Arlo Griffiths of Leiden.

Here is Griffith’s translation, done together with Alexander Lubotsky, of a poem that illustrates the importance of the Atharvaveda for the study of Indian medicine \(Paippalāda Saṃhitā 4: 15\). It deals with the healing of an open fracture with the help of a plant. The translation is literal and supplies within square brackets additional clarifications:

1. Let marrow be put together with marrow, and your joint together with joint, together what of your flesh has fallen apart, together sinew and together your bone.
2. Let marrow come together with marrow, let bone grow over \[together\] with bone. We put together your sinew with sinew, let skin grow with skin.
3. Let hair be put together with hair. \[The Rohiṇī-plant\] shall fit together skin with skin. Let your blood grow with blood; let flesh grow with flesh.
4. Grower \[are you\], healer, grower of the broken bone. You are born on the Rohiṇī-day, you are grower, o plant.
5. If broken, if inflamed is your own bone, your flesh, Dhātar shall fix it whole, he shall put together joint with joint.
6. If a thunderbolt that has been hurled has hit you, or if there is an injury due to falling into a well \(?\), or one that is there \[due to falling\] from a tree: the ten-headed one shall remove \[it\]. I put together your joint as Ṛbhu \[the parts\] of a chariot.
7. Stand up, go forth, your joint has been put together. Let Dhātar put together the injury of your body. Be steady in this way, as a chariot goes with good wheels, with good felloes, with good axle-holes, with good naves.

Many references call for a further explanation. Rohiṇī, a red cow, is also a plant and the name of the Rauhiṇa day of the lunar calendar. Dhātar, the arranger, is a creator, not in the monotheistic sense but one of several architects or fashioners of the universe or some of its regions, similar to the *demiurge* of the ancient Greeks. The Ṛbhus are a group of divinities and Ṛbhu is a builder of chariots, patron deity of the Rathakāra of Chapter 3. One question about this poem is to what extent its recitation may have been accompanied by actual surgery—a question that touches the heart of Vedic studies: to what extent are mantras, that often *accompany* activity, meant to *replace* it?

A different hymn \(Paippalāda Saṃhitā 6: 14\) is directed at various noxious creatures and is replete with even more unsolved puzzles. Yet, or precisely because of them, it is worth quoting. Here it is, as translated by Griffiths in his forthcoming edition, uncertainties and all:

1. The one with a large neck, born from dung, the one which is not a proper offering, eating bowel-contents—and the *koka*-faced Lip \(?\): these we cause to vanish from here.
2. The dark-toothed Splitter, the snake-nosed Striker, the Approacher \(?\) *balāhaka*, the *khela* that brays like an ass, the vulture that moves like an elephant: these do we cause to vanish from here.
3. The Grabber that eats what must be groped for, the Groper with a horrible hand, the Shuddering-eyed One with soft fingers, the Nail-strong One with force in the teeth: these do we cause to vanish from here.
4. The constantly approaching …, the phantom that tries to win \(food\); and also the slimy one with quills: these do we cause to vanish from here.
5. The Beater with a snout in front—the *ali*ṃ*śa* and the *vatsapa*; the Slipping one whose knot is as \[tight as\] that of a cord—the one belonging to the jungle, and the one belonging to *armas*: these do we cause to vanish from here.
6. The knee-hairy Asurian demon that roams here, that seeks out the absent-minded one; the Arāyas that are …, that are …, and on the hair, the ones that are Ś*vaki*ṣ*kin*: these do we cause to vanish from here.
7. The Asurian fiend who eats a man’s young boys, the hairy, dreadful Arāya who slays and eats men: him do we cause to vanish from here.
8. The one of the Arāyas, called Vein-eyed, who is in the house, killing where the sun does not reach: him do we cause to vanish from here.
9. The chewing, robbing Vitūla, and the ever climbing \(?\) Forest-Shriek\(er\); the eater of raw \[flesh\], that seeks out the absent-minded \[person\]; the one running around, wet all over; the deep howling of a wolf: these do we cause to vanish from here.

The unexpected discovery of these Paippalāda hymns focused attention on another surprising fact: manuscripts written in the Oriya script had hardly ever been used in Vedic Studies before. That has not been true with respect to other Indic so-called ‘vernacular’ scripts. Many important Vedic manuscripts from South India, written in Grantha or Malayalam, have been known for almost two centuries.

The Atharvaveda provides much information on ritual, especially domestic. Connections with the Śrauta ritual, from which it was originally excluded, are less firm. Speculations on ritual and ritual interpretations remind us of the Brāhmaṇas, but they occur in verse form. The Atharvaveda knows *rig*, *sāman* and *yajus*, the latter in a form that seems closest to the Taittirīya Yajurveda. It evinces wide knowledge of the Sāmaveda and some of its technicalities. There is specific information on how to chant *stuti*s. The principal composers of the Atharvaveda were closely related to chanters of *sāman*s as Stanley Insler has shown. Perhaps some precursors of Atharvavedins knew a form of Sāmaveda that was not yet entirely pervaded by the language of the Rigveda.

There is one topic left that may belong to the realm of the Atharvaveda though it is only known from post-Vedic sources.



### The Thesis of Kautsa

One much neglected thinker probably belonged to the Atharvaveda school of Śaunaka: Kautsa. The name is uncommon but not unknown. An early treatise on phonetics and phonology of the Śaunaka school is sometimes referred to as ‘Kautsa’s Grammar’. It is available in a recent critical edition with translation into English and extensive notes by Madhav Deshpande. The same name is associated with a work that has been lost but that presented a thesis that is well known. It has been much maligned but plays a major role in the history of ideas. In our present context, it occupies a special place: for as I am winding up my account of the four Vedas, we are approaching a more analytical treatment of some of the facts that have been assembled and the author of the thesis combined a vast knowledge of linguistics and mantras with an analytical mind.

The second Kautsa was a grammarian-cum-ritualist and keenly aware of the *difference* between language and mantras. His thesis was that, unlike language, of which meaning is the defining characteristic, ‘mantras are without meaning’: *anarthakā mantrā*ḥ. Kautsa may have articulated these views during the period of the middle Upaniṣads, say, around the fifth or fourth century BCE. It could be the same date as that of the Kautsa Grammar of the Śaunaka school though the latter does not even contain the term *mantra* and there are no indications, as far as I know, that the two Kautsas were the same. The name has an ominous ring. Though it is directly derived from Kutsa, the name of a seer, it is ultimately derived from a verb *kuts-* which means ‘despise’ or ‘revile’. Not to encourage prejudice, I shall call him ‘Kautsa’.

The period I mentioned was a revolutionary period during which many radically new perspectives were voiced. The second Kautsa was a revolutionary, but unlike many Upaniṣadic sages, he gave reasons for his views. It reflects his background, training and familiarity with early stages of Indic linguistics as well as the Rigveda.

It is not surprising that Kautsa works have been lost. Fortunately, some of his arguments have been preserved by his main critics in two different sources: the Nirukta, a treatise on etymology that is still assigned to the Vedas as a special science, and the Sūtra manual of the Mīmāṃsā school of ritual philosophy, composed some two centuries later, around the second century BCE.

It is unfortunate that all our information on Kautsa comes from opponents, but it is counterbalanced by an attractive feature of Sanskrit philosophical and scientific works: it is not uncommon for authors to provide fair summaries of their opponents’ theses. This commendable habit need not be entirely due to fairness: at the time of the earliest preserved opponents, the composers of the Nirukta, Kautsa works may have still have been around in the Oral Tradition. It would narrow down their own date to roughly the fourth century BCE, sealing off the Vedic period.

According to the Nirukta, Kautsa provided six arguments for his thesis, each except the first accompanied by two or more illustrations from the Rigveda. The manual of the Mīmāṃsā quotes a few others without referring to Kautsa explicitly. I shall mention the most perspicuous and give the clearest examples I can find, sometimes from a commentator:

1. In the Veda, the order of words may not be changed as is generally the case in Vedic or Sanskrit which are languages in which word order is basically free: since the inflected endings of the words convey their function, changing the order of words does not affect the meaning. It is different in the case of mantras: *agna āyāhi vītaye* \(*Six: Sāmaveda*\) may not be replaced by *āyāhi vītaye ‘gne* \(with a difference due to sandhi\) though both mean exactly the same: ‘O Agni, come to the feast\!’
2. The *sound* of the mantras may not be changed: words may not be replaced by synonyms, other words that mean the same as is common in ordinary language: the mantra *agni āyāhi vītaye* may not be replaced by *vibhāvaso āgaccha pānāya* ‘O fire god, proceed to the drinking\!’
3. Vedic mantras sometimes address inanimate objects such as stones or herbs, or things that do not exist, e.g., a being with four horns, three feet, two heads and seven hands.
4. If mantras were meaningful, it would have to be admitted that they sometimes contradict each other: one mantra asserts that there is only one Rudra, there never was a second, and another refers to ‘the innumerable thousands of Rudras’.
5. There is a tradition for mantras to be learnt by heart, but no corresponding tradition to teach and thereby preserve their meaning.

Since ordinary language exists for the sake of conveying meaning, Kautsa concluded that mantras are unlike the statements of ordinary language. This should not be interpreted as a form of scepticism or positivism. It is a purely ritualistic stance that limits mantras to their ritual use just as language is for the sake of meaning. Since the *Śrauta* ritual of the Yajurveda is performed for its own sake, it would be anachronistic to interpret Kautsa’s views in terms of later views, such as the more philosophic Upaniṣadic or Buddhist emphasis on knowledge \(*jñāna*\) or wisdom \(*prajñā*\) as a means toward enlightenment, or the more religious preaching of loving devotion of the later bhakti cults in which the soul is lifted up by the grace of a personal divinity. Even India’s greatest philosopher, Śaṇkara, an unquestioned follower of the Upaniṣads, quotes with approval a brāhmaṇa that declares: ‘he who teaches a mantra or officiates at a ritual with mantras without knowing their composer-seer, metre, deity and brāhmaṇa, will run his head against a pole or fall into a pit.’ In this list of requirements, Śaṇkara does not include knowledge or meaning: all he demands are formal data transmitted together with recitations. The triplet deity-composer-metre consists of recited names, as we have seen in Chapter 3. The brāhmaṇa itself is another recitation.

In Indic usage, mantras are meaningless from which it follows that they cannot be true or false. In modern English, ‘mantra’ is used in a different manner: it refers to a statement that is not meaningless but hollow, false and cynical. If an editorial in the *International Herald Tribune* says about the Bush administration’s statement ‘the economy is strong and getting stronger’ that it is a mantra, it means that it is a lie and that the opposite is true. In another respect, English and Indic mantras are the same: they are effective if and only if they are repeated incessantly.

With the Atharvaveda we seem to have come to the end of our survey of the four Vedas. We have seen that the Atharvaveda stood apart from the others though there are undoubted links; and that it probably gave rise to a philosophical thesis that affects the heart of the Veda. But we have not really come to the end. A glance at the table on *Four: The Four Vedas* demonstrates that we have so far mainly treated the Vedic Saṃhitā sections which constitute the core and are the oldest parts of the collections. There are several other important categories of Vedic works, including the Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads. We have looked at Brāhmaṇas of the Yajurveda because they are sometimes mixed with Mantra Sections, but there are Brāhmaṇas elsewhere. They will be combined with the Āraṇyakas and discussed in Chapter 9. The Upaniṣads are the topic of Chapter 10 but their list is open: Table 1 shows two names of Upaniṣads under the category of the Atharvaveda that are followed by ‘etc.’. Some other Vedic and many post-Vedic Upaniṣads that were looking for a home have been artificially attached to the Atharvaveda. The one remaining category of the Table, the Śrauta Sūtras, are the topic of Chapter 12.




