+++
title = "09 Brāhmaṇas Andāraṇyakas"

+++





### Villages, Forests and the Ecology

In Chapter 1 I have referred to a hypothetical period of 9,000 years during which the indigenous lineages of the subcontinent of South Asia remained widespread in both tribal and caste populations. Whether it was actually 9,000 years or more or less is irrelevant from our Vedic point of view. Other facts are more significant in our present context: Chapter 3 showed that caste was assigned to the Vedas by a post-Vedic and caste-obsessed society. Sedentary villages, on the other hand, pre-dated the Vedas. One such village with a history of some 5,000 years is well-known: the Neolithic village of Mehrgarh \(Frontispiece, near 8\).

The civilization of the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas or ‘Forest Books’ is certainly sedentary but illustrates at the same time that *forest* continued to be contrasted with *village*. Chapter 6 showed that the Sāmaveda distinguished, probably at an earlier period, between songs sung in the village and the more powerful and secret chants that were reserved for the forest or wilderness. It supplemented Chapter 3 which had detailed the interesting history in Vedic of the modern term for village, *grāma*: its meanings ranged from ‘trains of herdsmen’ to its modern denotation. As for *ara*ṇ*ya*, it was a frightening place and replete with power: hence ‘wilderness’ as well as ‘forest’. Vedic has also an intermediate term, *vana,* which refers to ‘woods’ where villagers went to collect wood along with herbs and medicinal plants. The *ara*ṇ*ya*, forest and wilderness as well as desert, was further away. What we call cities and states \(*nagara*\) do not seem to have come into being before the early Upaniṣads, in the Ganges valley, sixth to fourth centuries BCE.

Speaking of forests, deforestation has always been around the corner. Deforestation by fire may have started soon after its discovery. Copper and bronze appeared in due course but it took a few thousand years for them to be replaced by iron, between 1,000 and 500 BCE. Now strong weapons and tools assisted fire in clearing forests north of the Ganges. A well-known story of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa depicts Agni setting a path of flames going from west to east. He could not cross the Sadānīrā \(*nīra*, a word for river from Dravidian\) which is now called Gaṇḍak \(a Munda word, like perhaps Gaṇgā itself\), and the other side \(Videha, Sanskrit ‘without body’\) was regarded as inferior and uncultivated though it is likely that flourishing cultures existed. Not long thereafter, Vedas were composed there, including the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa itself. All these transitions were accompanied by conceptual changes. The Śatapatha exists in two versions as the Table of *Four: The Four Vedas* showed. ‘Breath’ \(*prā*ṇ*a*\), still preponderant in the Mādhyaṇdina recension, is replaced by *brahma* in the other, the Kāṇva recension.

New ideas appear when people cross mountains and rivers, meet others and begin to settle down.



### Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas

We have seen that the term *Brāhma*ṇ*a* is used in several senses. The meaning with which we are concerned in this chapter is one of them: a Vedic composition in prose. In the Yajurveda, that composition is mainly concerned with interpretations of mantras in ritual terms. In the Rig-, Sāma- and Atharva-Vedas, a Brāhmaṇa is more like a separate unit—what we have in mind when we think of a ‘book’. But all these compositions continue to be oral and orally transmitted, sometimes with the old accents. To be a composer one now had to be not only a ritual expert, preferably a priest, but also a scholar, familiar with the tradition. No wonder that such people were called *Brāhma*ṇ*a*. They were no longer sages, they were specialists who composed Brāhmaṇas or pieces thereof, and liked to be the advisers of rulers or chieftains. In all these capacities, being specialists did not prevent them from holding forth about anything that took their fancy. Like authors of successful books, they could count on an audience. They are in many respects like *authors*, only they did not write; but they expressed their opinions forcefully, putting themselves in their compositions, and they became *authorities*. That is what brahmins, as I may now call them, always remained, in India as elsewhere where we find them during the post-Vedic periods. Khmer, Javanese, Balinese, Thai and other brahmans remained ritual experts and advisors to rulers or chieftains.

In the Black Yajurveda, the Brāhmaṇas that these *brāhma*ṇ*a* authorities composed, were still relatively closely attached to the poetry, now called Mantra, which they interpreted in ritual terms. But what they say is meant or intended there, has often nothing to do with the Mantras they followed. We have already met with these Brāhmaṇas in Chapter 7 on the Yajurveda. I shall not repeat any of this here but *Seven: Yajurveda* would fit in the present chapter precisely at this spot.

The White Yajurveda, a reform movement, returned to the structure of the Rigveda: it consists in its entirety of verse. So does the Atharvaveda, and the Sāmaveda in a similar manner but here the verse are chants. Āraṇyakas which are ‘Forest’ or ‘Wilderness’ compositions are the final parts of Brāhmaṇas or attached to them in the Yajurveda. In the Rigveda they are transmitted as separate compositions.

If we look at Table 1 on pp. 80–81, these differences are expressed as follows. In the Rig-, Sāma-, Atharva- and White Yajurveda, Saṃhitā and Brāhmaṇa are distinct and have different names. In the Black Yajurveda, there is one continuous series of compositions that starts with sequences of Mantras and Brāhmaṇas and to which Āraṇyakas and even Upaniṣads are attached. Āraṇyakas occur in the White Yajurveda also but are attached to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. This includes the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upaniṣad which is an Āraṇyaka as its name says. The only other Āraṇyakas are listed under Rigveda where they belong.

So much for the forms. What about the contents? I have already alluded to the fact that almost anything may be put in a Brāhmaṇa. That applies to the Āraṇyakas as well. In the Yajurveda chapter, I heaped much adverse comment on both ‘literary’ genres—if that is what they are. Although both contain valuable information and insights, the modern student has to ferret them out. ‘Ferreting’ does not imply that we impose extraneous criteria on a composition that is constructed in accordance with a well-thought-out scheme; for that is not what the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas are. They are large depositories of interpretations, comments and observations that sometimes follow the order of ritual proceedings, elsewhere interrupt their course and shift to other rites or reflections on an almost unlimited range of topics. They are mixed or put together with etymologies, stories, speculations, and a great deal of what we may call magic but is better, more truthfully and less condescendingly or insultingly described as simple superstition. It is the kind of thing with which authorities can get away.

We need not accept ‘multiculturalism’, but should we not be charitable? We should be, but there is a limit even to charity. We do need to distinguish between valuable and valueless; without this nothing has any value and ‘discovering’ or ‘analysing’ is idle. From that point of view the two large Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda are the most attractive. Most suspect is the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, ‘Brāhmaṇa of the Hundred Paths’ of the White Yajurveda, a veritable encyclopedia of meandering opinions on ritual and other matters. A simple example is its discussion of the term *upā*ṃ*śu* in the sense of ‘indistinct’ \(rather than the more technical ‘articulate but inaudible’ to which we return in Chapter 15\). The Śatapatha regarded it as the appropriate form of invocation when addressing the ‘ineffable’ \(*anirukta*\) creator god Prajāpati, ‘Lord of Creatures’. The Brāhmaṇa declares that the indistinct is appropriate to Prajāpati ‘because the indistinct is the ineffable, the ineffable is the whole and Prajāpati is the whole world.’ Why does it not make sense? Because it is parallel to a declaration that is palpably absurd: ‘blue is green because everything is green and cheese is everything.’

The Śatapatha is one of the largest Brāhmaṇas, accessible through the five volumes of Eggeling’s translation into English that was published in the *Sacred Books of the East* between 1882 and 1897 and has been reprinted often. It continues to enjoy great popularity because of its availability and because it contains enough material to support *any* theory.

Eggeling must have spent a good part of his life translating the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. He speaks with authority, therefore, when he declares in the third sentence of his Introduction to the first volume:
>
> For wearisome prolixity of exposition, characterized by a flimsy symbolism rather than by serious reasoning, these works are perhaps not equalled anywhere; unless, indeed, it be by the speculative vapourings of the Gnostics …

The Gnostics were a variety of Christian and non-Christian teachings, written in Greek during the first centuries CE in the Near East.

Keith and other translators of the second half of the ninenteenth century and the beginning decades of the twentieth agree with these harsh judgements and so do I as the reader will have noted. Some Vedic scholars have subsequently tuned down the purple prose to a watery rose. Jan Gonda, author of roughly a hundred volumes on Vedic and related matters, has tried to place the facts in a wider context of an ethnography that is now rather dated, but without expressing similar feelings of distaste. Should we or should we not be charitable?

We should take our sources seriously, for to do otherwise is merely an insult to the composers. The difficulty is that they make no sense as a statement in language, whether it is Vedic or English. For a statement to make sense it must obey the minimum of logic that lies at the core of every human language. Children are at first unaware of it, but it is already part of their mental structure. They become conscious of and familiar with it when they pick up a language. If a mother says to her child, in any language: ‘blue is green because everything is green and cheese is everything,’ the child asks: ‘What do you mean, Mama?’

It is in that same spirit that we must ask the same question from the Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads.



### Locating Obscurities, Esotericism and Irrationalities

*Parok*ṣ*akāmā hi devā*ḥ: ‘The gods love what is out of sight\!’

I don’t know what the gods love, but we have to widen our perspective if we wish to understand, not only who were the brāhmaṇa authors of these early prose compositions of the Veda and to what kind of society they belonged, but what was in their minds insofar as it is distinct from what is in our own. Some people say: we cannot know, and stop there. I say: we must explore the unknown. This implies that we must begin to tolerate uncertainty. We want to find out what our Brāhmaṇa composers know but we are also aware that they do not know what we know. One thing we find is that they had different ideas about *conveying* knowledge.

The composers of the Rigveda initially composed for family or clan members. That is why much remains obscure to us, as it would be to other outsiders—but that was not the special intention of the creators. The audience they had in mind was their natural sounding board. When we come to the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas, the audience as well as the contexts have changed. It is clearly visible in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. We can speak here of esotericism or the keeping of secret doctrines. But what is secret here? Should we remain satisfied that it remains ‘out of sight?’

Some of it we can only understand too well. The mystic equivalences we find in the Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads, referred to as *bandhu*, are often connected with pseudo-etymologies and sometimes it is enough for them to share a sound \(e.g., the consonant *p* as in *puroruc* is *prā*ṇ*a*, ‘vital breath’\). They may be based on loose semantics, as in the Śatapatha’s repeated declarations: ‘Ritual is language’ or ‘Ritual is man.’ They are explained by fancy reasons that point at existing connections which do not, however, establish that the two members are *identical*. Thus, ‘Ritual is language’ is explained by saying that utterances of language accompany ritual; and ‘Ritual is man’ by explaining that ritual measurements are based upon the size of the ritual patron. But ritual is neither and what is gained by spreading confusion? It may keep outsiders out and insiders in which is where they already are. Since they perform no other function and there is neither content nor literary flavour in any of these games, they can only be described as puerile.

I am not saying that the authors of these nonsensical phrases are stupid. They know the intricacies of ritual—a complex topic—and the grammatical rules and properties of their language. As for irrationalities, these are common worldwide and possess a certain straightforwardness. They are ultimately reduceable to contradictions of the form, ‘*A is not–A.*’ They make no sense and do not convey anything because the function of the particle *not* is to deny what follows and one cannot at the same time affirm and deny in the same respct. Contradictory knowledge is not knowledge. It is another way of saying that Brāhmaṇas are not veda.

Rational insight is a rare commodity compared to the vast universe of irrationalities that people and language produce. Knowledge, therefore, is the ferreting out of what is of value. This was clearly explained by Āryabhaṭa, the greatest Indic mathematician before Srinivasa Ramanujan, who described one of his discoveries as ‘a precious sunken jewel from the ocean of true and false knowledge’. Al-Bīrūnī, equally great as a scientist and also a student of Indic civilization, characterized Indic science in similar terms as ‘a mixture of pearl shells and sour dates, or of pearls and dung, or of costly crystal and common pebbles’. Since he was a Muslim and outsider, his statement caused irritation and even anger though it is essentially the same as Āryabhaṭa’s. A similar statement, even more colourful is due to Johannes Keppler, scientist and mystic:
>
> No one should regard it as incredible that out of the nonsense and godlessness of astrology,  
not a useful thought or insight,  
out of dirty slime, not something edible for a snail, mussel, oyster or eel,  
out of a big heap spun by caterpillars not a spider,  
and finally out of a stinking pile of excrement, by an industrious chicken  
not something, a good grain, even a pearl or gold pellet, can be extracted and found.

It looks as if Keppler knew, or would have loved to know, that the lotus is born from mud \(*pa*ṇ*kaja*\). If his verdict applies to the history of science, should we expect the bulky Brāhmaṇas to be excluded? They are not and it is time for us to look for gold pellets.

The Rigvedic Aitareya Brāhmaṇa \(AB\) is the earliest source that is explicit about the Sarasvatī river ‘ending in the desert’. As we have seen at the beginning of Part I, the Rigveda called it Sarasvatī after a river their ancestors or predecessors had encountered earlier: the *Harax’aitî*. Both names mean ‘provided with ponds’. and refer to two rivers that ended in the desert. The AB knew this because it was familiar with Sind which the Rigveda was not. The same information is found in other Brāhmaṇas, such as the Jaiminīya and the Pañcaviṃśa of the Sāmaveda, which add details on rituals performed on the very spot where the river disappeared in the sand.

On a different level, the AB provides valuable pearls in its description of some of the details of Vedic pronunciation. These include a first discussion of the concept of *upā*ṃ*śu* and reflections of phonetics and phonology that pertain not only to Vedic recitation, but to the emerging uses of the living language of spoken Sanskrit. They led to the *Prātiśākhya* treatises of the Vedic science of language, to Pāṇini’s Sanskrit grammar and to modern linguistics as will be sketched later in Chapter 14.

Other valid insights are hidden in the muddy contexts of the Aitareya Āraṇyaka \(AA\). We shall see in that same Chapter, that Śākalya separated the words of the Rigveda Saṃhitā from each other in his Padapāṭha. The AA was familiar with earlier terminologies that refer to these varieties. The AA also discussed nominal compounds such as the expression *pada-pā*ṭ*ha*, ‘recitations of words’, itself; and the various relationships between its two members. The AA chronicles mythological views according to which the prior part of such compounds refers to earth, the later part to the heavens, and their Saṃhitā combination to the wind. Others argued that Saṃhitā is the space between heaven and earth. Whatever one may think of the speculations, they presuppose precise knowledge of *sandhi* or ‘euphonic combination’, syntax and the properties of nominal compounds.

The Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa of the Rigveda, commenting on the *puroruc* ‘prior light’ recital that precedes the recitation of a Rigvedic hymn, provides a bit of slime on which we almost slipped in Chapter 7 \(*Seven: Yajurveda*\). It is not contradictory but slimy because it is tantamount to saying: it may be A because of X, or perhaps B, or maybe C.

I conclude that there is much in the Vedic tradition that we do not know or understand. The same holds for the Brāhmaṇas and other Vedic prose, but with one difference: they did not want us to know. That makes trying to know more difficult, but still enables us to draw two conclusions that apply to both Vedic poetry and prose: \(1\) the composers might have known more than we do; and \(2\) there is no reason to believe that the smartest among us are smarter than the smartest among them.




