+++
title = "10 Upaniṣads"

+++





### Generalities

The Vedic or Classical Upaniṣads are sometimes called Vedānta or ‘End \(*anta*\) of the Veda’. The term occurs first after the end of the Vedic period, in the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad \(fourth to third centuries BCE?\), when the Upaniṣads were looked upon as a separate group and it was felt that the ritualistic Veda had reached its ‘end’, the English word that is not only etymologically related to Sanskrit *anta* but has its same double connotation: the final portion of a thing, and also its goal, ultimate aim or destination. Not only aficionados of the Upaniṣads stress the latter meanings, they are the only ones that are acceptable because the composers of the Upaniṣads did not adopt a historical perspective. But the term Vedānta has an entirely different meaning also. It refers to a group of Indic philosophies that look at the Upaniṣads as their source of inspiration, not necessarily the only one. One of the earliest of these is the philosophy of Bhāskara who lived around 800 CE. Many of his works have been lost and he left no school. More or less contemporary with him is Śaṇkara, also a follower of the Upaniṣads, to whose theories Bhāskara made vitriolic references. But Śaṇkara eclipsed him and became the most famous philosopher of India. His Vedānta is called A-dvaita Vedānta because its position is ‘non-dual’. Another Vedānta is the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta of Rāmānujā \(twelfth century CE\) who defends a ‘qualified non-dualism’, yet another is the Dvaita Vedānta of Madhvācārya \(thirteenth century CE\) who accepts dualism. And there are others.

I recommend that the reader make a distinction between these later philosophies, all of whom invoke the Upaniṣads, and the Upaniṣads themselves; and take care not to interpret the latter solely or too strictly in terms of them. All such interpretations are anachronistic.

The term *upa-ni-*ṣ*ad* is derived from *sad-*, *ni* and *upa* which mean ‘sit,’ ‘down’ and ‘close’ \(as in *upā*ṃ*śu*: *Seven: Yajurveda*\), respectively. Most modern scholars have interpreted its changing meanings as referring to mystical hidden connections. But these were already a favoured topic of the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas, referred to by the Sanskrit term *bandhu*, which was widely used. I accept the traditional interpretation: ‘sitting close \(to the teacher\)’ and therefore: secret \(*rahasya*\). It is a one-to-one relationship. There are several reasons for this interpretation. The Upaniṣads are full of stories of students looking for teachers. Sitting is venerable, auspicious even, a topic on which I shall expatiate in Chapter 13. Secrecy is the last remnant of the originally secret oral traditions of families and clans. There is one paradox: the Upaniṣads became the most famous part of the Vedas. Does it mean that if one keeps something secret, it will eventually become public? Given the obsession with exposing secrets \(or scandals\), the answer must be, yes.

The Upaniṣads are an open-ended class. There are more than a hundred of them. That includes the Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads, a large group of so-called Minor Upaniṣads and the Allah Upaniṣad. If that Upaniṣad had been regarded as secret and had been canonized like the Classical Upaniṣads, it might not have been forgotten and could be invoked by Indians and Pakistanis, Muslims and Hindus, who are eager to improve relations.

We shall be confined to the Vedic or Classical Upaniṣads, a group of twelve or thirteen which are attached to Vedic schools as depicted on Table I.

The earliest are perhaps the Sāmaveda Upanisads which fit in the context of Chapter 6 for they are connected with chant and especially with OM. Their chronological layers continue to be discussed, but the most well known of them remains the Chāndogya Upaniṣad which may be assigned to the seventh or sixth century BCE and was composed in the Kuru-Pañcāla region. About equally old is the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upaniṣad, the final sections of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, largely composed much further east in Videha.

The two are similar in some respects; but the differences are remarkable in that they may have something to do with Buddhism, both with regard to contents and in terms of geography. The CU, with its emphasis on chanting, is more *positive* than the BĀU which emphasizes the *via negativa*, the negative path that culminates in the famous declaration *neti neti*, ‘it is not this, it is not that.’ That emphasis is a characteristic of Buddhism as we shall see in Chapter 16. It describes how the Buddha, born at the Himalayan foothills, close to the modern border between India and Nepal, made his way southward, crossing Videha until he reached the kingdom of Magadha with which we have been familiar since the map of Figure 2 where it is indicated by Mg. There is a historical gap of almost two centuries, but that large region of Videha is also where parts of the BĀU were composed. Is that negative path a characteristic of the eastern extremities of Vedic India? That thesis would be supported by geography and history for it would require a leap across at least one century during which the Taittirīya, Aitareya and Kauṣītaki Upaniṣads were composed. These five Upaniṣads, including CU \(Chandogya Upaniṣad\) and BĀU \(Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upanisad\) are almost certainly pre-Buddhist.

A striking feature of the early Upaniṣads is the tradition of public debates that took place at the court of a king. It is a step in the direction of what is nowadays called the public domain. Wandering sages, philosophers, women, naked ascetics, monks and others attended. Serious attention was paid to logical argumentation and who were the winners and losers. This feature earned the Upaniṣads the Greek or English label ‘philosophy’.

The majority of these works, composed orally in classical Sanskrit, represent the perspective of Brāhmaṇas or brahmans, as we may now call them, on the one hand; and kings, princes or chieftains, referred to as *k*ṣ*atriya*, on the other. Such *k*ṣ*atriya–brāhma*ṇ*a* alliances, often assigned to an earlier period, may have started only by this time. It is not merely a political alliance between knowledge and power: it signals the emergence of rulers who became famous as intellectual leaders. It does not imply, of course, that a caste system of three or four existed. *Jāti* and *var*ṇ*a* keep their Vedic sense.

The Upaniṣadic renaissance is part of a deeper and wider ferment in culture and society. Its significance has been overrated, but there is no doubt that it presents one of the basic cognitive and intellectual junctures in human history, and in that sense a culmination of the Vedic period. Apart from their language, the great contributions of that period have little that is ‘Aryan’ or ‘Indo-Aryan’ about them. Though presented as such in our Vedic sources, they are not confined to brahmins and kṣatriyas. We have to look behind and beyond them to find out more about other participants and contributors and strengthen what we find with supplementary information from other sources, e.g., the contemporary Jaina and the later Buddhist.

I shall illustrate the procedure with the help of the claim I made that participants in the public included ‘wandering sages, philosophers, women, naked ascetics, monks and others’. The Upaniṣads refer mostly to the king and many brahmans as the active and creative participants in the debates. ‘Brahmans’ may be members of a class or, simply, learned men. Women participants are mentioned by name but there is no mention of ‘naked ascetics and monks’. Why did I include them? Because they were a common feature of the period. They included the adherents of earlier religions or sects such as the Jaina and Ājīvika, as well as the later Buddhists, the only ones who did not go about naked. All these non-Vedic groups refer to brahmans, are familiar with their doctrines and adapt, adopt or criticize them. The non-Vedic groups are not explicitly mentioned in the Upaniṣads, because they were not Vedic which the Upaniṣads were.

All these facts are likelihoods, as empirical facts are bound to be, but we can gain strong confirmation of them by looking at *names*. About 300 words that occur in the Rigveda are not Indo-Aryan or Indo-European and come from elsewhere \(Chapter 1\). Chapter 6 on Sāmaveda described how Rigvedic verse were set to melodies that belonged to an indigenous lineage that had long been settled and had its own language or languages. A closer look at the forest songs showed that some of the names in them are non-Indo-European and some have the structure of the reconstructed BMAC language as we have seen.

The Upaniṣadic descriptions of debates are similarly replete with names of sages that are non-Indo-European. Most important—because they refer to a more distant past—are names that occur in lineages at the end of some Upaniṣadic chapters. My impression of about sixty-five names at the end of the fourth chapter of the BĀU, starting with Pautimāṣya and ending with Brahman, is that almost half are non-Indo-European. Many look Indo-European but may not be. They may be Sanskritizations of non-Indo-European words like the term for brick in the BMAC language that became *i*ṣṭ*akā*, also discussed in Chapter 1. There is enough material for a book that could make a valuable contribution provided it is written by a linguist who knows Vedic, Indo-European and is familiar with the general characteristics of other language families in Asia.

Other than language, there are social indications in the dialogues and debates of the Upaniṣads that demonstrate that their authors belonged to an open society in which people from different backgrounds came together. The crossing of boundaries started modestly. ‘Different backgrounds’ is perhaps an insufficient description of an important inclusion: that of women. I shall give two positive and one negative illustration, but the most important is the first because it points to the past: some of the lineages to which I just referred show that parts of the transmission were matrilineal \(e.g., BĀU 6.5.1–3\).

The other positive illustration does not apply to women in general but comes from Yājñavalkya who taught his greatest secret to his wife as we have seen at the outset of this book. He said to her: ‘The two of us are like two halves of a block’ \(BĀU 1.4.3\). But he meted out a different treatment to another woman, Gārgī, a descendant of Garga who composed a poem in the Rigveda, and was a great debater. She was called ‘Vācaknavī’, which means eloquent as well as loquacious and is also used for men. Gārgī asked Yājñavalkya a long series of questions starting with: ‘Since this world is woven back and forth on water, on what, then, is water woven back and forth?’ He answered ‘air’ whereupon Gārgī asked the same question with regard to the intermediate region—and so on it went with sun, moon, etc. Finally, Yājñavalkya says: ‘Don’t ask too many questions\!’ Gārgī fell silent, but after a few more exchanges, turned to the audience: ‘Distinguished brahmins\! You should consider yourself lucky if you escape from this man by merely paying him your respects. None of you will ever defeat him in a debate\!’

The crossing of boundaries started modestly, as I mentioned, and the same applies to Vedas, Vedic schools and differences of age as at least one example illustrates. Once king Janaka wished to perform a large ritual. He corralled a thousand cows. To the horns of each cow, ten pieces of gold were tied. Brahmans from Kuru and Pañcāla flocked to his court and he addressed them: ‘Let the most learned man among you drive away these cows\!’ No one moved. So Yājñavalkya, a White Yajurvedin, called his pupil: ‘Sāmaśravas\! Son, drive these cows away\!’ He did, the Brahmins were furious and murmured: ‘How dare he claim to be the most learned\!’ Sāmaśravas, ‘Song Fame’, was obviously a strapping young Sāmavedin.

The crossing of the brahman class line is illustrated by the story of Satyakāma, ‘Truth Loving’ Jābāla. It is referred to several times in the CU and the BĀU and was obviously popular. ‘S.J.,’ as I shall call him, told his mother he wanted to become a Vedic student and asked for his lineage. His mother said:
>
> Son, I don’t know what your lineage is. I was young when I had you. I was a maid then and had a lot of relationships. It is now impossible for me to say what your lineage is. But my name is Jabālā and your name is Satyakāma. So you should simply say that you are Satyakāma Jābāla.

S.J. went to a famous teacher and asked to be accepted as his student. The guru asked him for his lineage and S.J. repeated, word for word, what his mother had told him, adding at the end: ‘So I am Satyakāma Jābāla, Sir.’ The teacher said: ‘Who but a brahman could speak like that\!’ and accepted him. Why did he do it? Because *satyakāma* means ‘lover of truth’. By accepting S.J., the teacher added fuel to two beliefs that imply each other: the belief that he accepted a brahman pupil and the belief of all brahmans that all brahmans always speak the truth—that is why they are wise men, not on account of birth.

It is clear that at the time of the Upaniṣads, the term ‘brahman’ was still a flexible term. It had neither genetic content, nor did it occupy a fixed place in a rigid system of classes let alone caste. It continued to be so in later times, not within the subcontinent, where the caste system hardened, but in different societies elsewhere. The brahmans of Southeast Asia had strong ties with the rulers, but were brahmans in a very loose sense.

The *Upani*ṣ*ads* as ‘sitting down close’ \(*Ten: Upaniṣads*\) of pupil and teacher were sometimes the outcome of a public debate where a famous thinker had been asked questions and dispensed answers. If the questioner was not satisfied with the answer, such a dialogue ensued.



### Karma, Rebirth and Life after Death

The most celebrated Upaniṣadic speaker and philosopher was Yājñavalkya. The debate, recorded or imagined by the composer of the BĀU, took an unexpected turn when he was asked by Ārthabhāga what happens when a man dies. He took a number of steps and his first question was: Where does the breath of a dead person go? Yājñavalkya gave the kind of down-to-earth answer that is typical of him: ‘His breaths do not depart of him. They accumulate within his body, causing it to swell and become bloated.’ Many further questions follow, but they are not rebuffed as we shall see. Ārthabhāga asks where go speech, mind, hearing, body, self, hair, blood and semen when a man dies. Yājñavalkya provides answers to all those questions, but Ārthabhāga persists and asks: what happens to the person himself? Yājñavalkya replies: ‘My friend, we cannot talk about this in public. Take my hand, Ārthabhāga; let’s discuss this in private.’ So they leave, and talk about it. What did Yājñavalkya and Ārthabhāga talk about? They talked about:
>
> Nothing but action \(*karma*\). And what did they praise?—they praised nothing but action. Yājñavalkya told him: ‘A man turns into something good by good action \(*pu*ṇ*ya karma*\) and into something bad by bad action \(*pāpa karma*\).’ Thereupon Ārthabhāga fell silent.

This famous passage touches not so much on secrecy as on the distinction between public and private. Unlike my earlier characterizations of the Upaniṣads, it is a step away from the public domain. The common translation ‘in private’ corresponds to *na sajana* in the original. It means literally ‘not with people’. Vedic has *sa-jana* which simply means ‘with people’ or ‘public’. Later Sanskrit has *vi-jana* which means ‘without people’ or ‘private’. The Upaniṣadic words are correctly translated as ‘in private’.

Why should these apparently innocent phrases not be discussed in public? The question has been much discussed. Here are two samples, one classical and one modern.

Toward the close of the eighth century CE, the time of the great Pallava and early Chola temples and sculptures of South India, an explanation was given by Śaṇkara, the famous philosopher of the Advaita Vedānta. According to him, breath, speech, mind, blood, semen, etc., are rational topics of discussion. We may not agree with his subdivisions and explanations, but we accept that they are apt topics for a public debate. It could take place at a student society of a medical school. But the topic of Ārthabhāga’s question is different, says Śaṇkara:
>
> Different schools have imagined or construed \(the Sanskrit is: *parikalpitāni*\) different answers, e.g., nature \(the opinion of the Mīmāṃsā school, Śaṇkara’s rival\), chance \(the materialists\), time \(astrologers\), action \(followers of the Vedas\), gods \(believers in gods\), consciousness-only or emptiness \(two Buddhist schools\). When there are so many basic differences, determining the truth cannot simply be achieved by defeating the opponent \(*jalpanyāya*\).

Śaṇkara explains Yājñavalkya’s insistence on privacy by arguing that it is concerned with a different kind of topic and therefore the usual methods cannot be applied. What then did they really talk about? Śaṇkara says: ‘Having agreed on time, action and gods, they praised only good action which is enjoined by the tradition. Since bad is the opposite of good, it follows that the opposite holds for bad.’ Śaṇkara’s explanation, that these are matters of choice and not of logic, confirms that he was a Vedāntin or follower of the Vedic tradition. It is a flaw in a philosopher, magnified when attributed to an ancient sage, because the Vedānta is closer to a religion than to a philosophy; but that is not the point. It is a rational explanation for Yājñavalkya’s insistence on privacy.

The only modern author, who has addressed the question, has offered a different but equally rational explanation: a famous anthropologist and original thinker, Gananath Obeyesekhere. In his book *Imagining Karma*, he has shown that among the world’s eschatologies, *rebirth* is the default option. It occurs among Buddhists, Greeks, moderns and in small indigenous societies of West Africa, Melanesia and North America. But Obeyesekhere has another item on his agenda. He is concerned with showing that the Buddhist concept of rebirth is ethical because it employs the same terms, good action \(*pu*ṇ*ya karma*\) and bad action \(*pāpa karma*\), which he interprets as referring to ‘religious merit’ and ‘sin’, respectively. He attributes Yājñavalkya’s desire for privacy to the fact, that knowledge of karma and rebirth was new to the Vedic tradition. That is far from obvious, but a discussion of this problem has not so far been undertaken. It shows that Vedic studies are still replete with unexplored treasures.

Traces of rebirth are found not only in the Rigveda, but are connected with a general belief expressed in many Indo-European sources, and elsewhere, that departed ancestors return as birds. In the Rigveda, these birds may take up a human body in the same family from which they departed before they became birds. The Brāhmaṇas take a different line: man is born first from parents, then through ritual, and a third time through the fire of cremation. In all these cases, ascension to the place of the ancestors is regarded as temporary which implies that rebirth is an option.

In the Sāmaveda, return to earth from the next world may be effected by chanting *stuti*s. The Tāṇḍya Mahābrāhmaṇa explains: ‘Just as one, having climbed up to the top of a big tree, would get down by taking hold of branch after branch, so he gets down onto this earth by means of this arrangement of *stuti*s, in order that he may get a firm support’ \(translation Yasuke Ikari\).

Quotations from the Sāmaveda may support Obeyesekhere’s idea, that rebirth is not Vedic, if it is true, as I have argued, that the Sāmavedic chants belonged to an indigenous lineage. But the Rigveda itself and other Vedic sources have other relevant things to say.

Funeral mantras from the Rigveda allude to meetings with the ancestors through an entity called *iṣṭāpūrta*, the reward of the correct performance of ritual and good deeds: ‘Unite with the ancestors, with death, with your *iṣṭāpūrta* in the highest heaven. Leaving behind all imperfections, come home again; merge with a \(new\) glorious body’ \(RV 10.14.8\). Elsewhere, Agni is asked to treat the body, that has been burnt at the cremation, gently: ‘Set him free to go back to the ancestors, Agni, when he freely wanders having been offered to you with the funeral meal. Dressed for a new life, he descends again to those who stayed behind. Let him merge with a new body, O Knower of Men\!’ \(RV 10.16.5\).

Apart from mantras, it is funeral rites that provide the most telling evidence. Yasuke Ikari had already drawn attention to one such rite that suggests that the grandfather is reborn as his great-grandson. Similar cases occur in a variety of cultures Obeyesekhere has discussed. The largest number of references to *iṣṭāpūrta* from a great variety of Vedic sources is provided by P.V. Kane in Vol. II, Part II of his *History of Dharmaśāstra*. We will need renewed study of Vedic funeral rites, neglected since Caland’s pioneering monograph of 1896, reprinted in 1967. Many are still performed in corners of the subcontinent, in Gokarna, for example.

The two Rigvedic verses I have quoted belong to the late tenth circle—composed, say, around 1,100 BCE. Similar verse from the Atharvaveda may belong to a slightly later period. The lateness of the two verses may support Obeyesekhere.

I have kept for last the most widespread Vedic idea about karma as rebirth which requires less discussion because it is so well known. It operates with a cyclical concept of time and two paths, the path of the ancestors \(*pit*ṛ*yāna*\) and that of the gods \(*devayāna*\). Those who take the former, associated with the moon, return to earth. Those who take the latter, associated with the sun, do not return but go to the world of the gods.

I have gone far enough to show, that Gananath Obeyesekhere’s book has opened up new vistas of which the end is not even in sight.



### Karma, Jñāna and Bhakti

The Upaniṣads are not all like the famous dialogue between Yājñavalkya and Ārthabhāga. They continue from the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas and contain, therefore, the usual mixture of pearls and dung. A striking specimen of the latter is crisply formulated by the CU \(1.3.3\):
>
> The interval between exhalation and inhalation is suspended breath. Suspended breath is language.

I am not familiar with any theory of language that is more succinct than this. Armand Minard, the greatest expert of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa since Eggeling, paid it a kind of compliment which I translate from the French:
>
> If this passage assimilates phonation and suspended breath, it is not a sign of ignorance but an esotericism that moves within a circle of thought that is closed to vulgar knowledge even if it is scientific.

Minard does not give an example of a scientific insight from within that esoteric circle of thought, but the explanation lies undoubtedly in Sāmavedic chants and other similar recitations that have to be sung without taking breath. This is not easy as may be gathered from the transcriptions I have given in Chapter 6 which do not mark where breath is taken. I measured the length of the initial ‘o’ of several chants: the average is 18 seconds. During such an interval of suspended breath, I would have plenty of time to do some talking—more than enough to serve as a foundation for a succinct theory of language.

Fortunately, large sections of the Upaniṣads are pervaded by a current of fresh air that is different from anything found in earlier Vedic. The only exceptions, which sometimes surpass them, are the speculative poems of the late Rigveda. They were composed further west a few centuries before the earliest Upaniṣads.

If I were forced to generalize about the differences between the immediately preceding Brāhmaṇas and the Upaniṣads, I would say that *karma* or ‘ritual’ is to the Brāhmaṇas what *jñāna* or ‘knowledge’ is to the Upaniṣads. It does not contradict Yājñavalkya’s praise of *karma* as moral activity so let me try to be a little bit more precise.

The term *karma* means many things. It always refers to some kind of activity but in the Brāhmaṇas it refers primarily to ritual activity. The Upaniṣads teach that humans are bound by ritual and freed by knowledge. The embarrassment with regard to mantras and ritual that we encountered in the previous chapter, gives way in the Upaniṣads to a radical denunciation of ritual and an impassioned plea for pure knowledge that confirms their *Vedic* nature and would be an adornment to any institute of higher learning.

My simplistic explanation of the distinction between Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads in terms of *karma* and *jñāna* is inspired by the Bhagavad Gītā \(BG\), which was itself inspired by the Upaniṣads. It is called an Upaniṣad in some of its colophons. BG belongs to the epic and is later than the Śvetāśvatara, one of the latest classical Upaniṣads. It would, therefore, be an anachronistic explanation. We have always treated anachronistic explanations with caution, but what exactly is wrong with them?

An anachronistic interpretation is often misleading because it neglects history. Anachronistic interpretations impose modern concepts on ancient ones that have nothing to do with them. To say of the chariot, on which the Aśvins travelled through space, that it was an airplane is a good example. It is based on errors of history, omissions and confusions. Constructing an airplane is based upon a technology that derives from the science of aerodynamics, a discipline that could develop only after Newton had created dynamics. He in turn could not have done so if he had not studied Euclidian geometry and his successors could not have made this effective unless the Arabs had introduced algebra to Europe.

Using the BG to interpret the difference between Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads is not as bad because composers of the Upaniṣads would at least understand it—though *bhakti*, to which I return, would be unfamiliar to earlier ones. So let us tread carefully and try to avoid pitfalls.

The BG is helpful because it puts *karma* and *jñāna* in the context of life and death with which everyone is familiar. Arjuna asks Shri Krishna whether he should fight or not. Yes, says Krishna, you must act, that means kill, but you should abandon the fruits of action \(*karma-phala-tyāga*\). The term *tyāga*, ‘abandonment’ reminds us of Vedic ritual where the patron says after each oblation: ‘this is for Agni, not for me’ \(and similarly for other gods\). It is a simple rite and the patron does not give up the fruits, but merely the ownership of the substance of his oblation. Outside ritual, abandonment of attachment to the fruits of action is difficult as Arjuna is about to discover. Shri Krishna helps him by placing his dilemma in a wider perspective. There are, he says, three ‘ways’: *karmayoga*, *jñānayoga* and *bhaktiyoga*.

About *karma* and *jñāna*, the Gītā says many different things. Discipline of action \(*karma-yoga*\) is better than renunciation of action \(5.2\). But knowledge is better than ritual \(4.33\), a statement that summarizes the message of the Upaniṣads and their reaction to the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas. The BG is not a philosophical treatise attempting consistency. It is a devotional work. But it is clear in the long run that it prefers to *karma* and *jñāna*, *bhakti* or ‘loving devotion’ which does not occur in the Vedas. *Bhakti* makes its first appearance in Upaniṣads such as the Śvetāśvatara and Muṇḍaka, probably composed during the last few centuries BCE. The Śvetāśvatara refers to the grace of god. It is a god who is ‘higher than *Brahman*’ and known as ‘the Lord’. It also refers to ‘one Rudra who has not tolerated a second’ \(recall that, in Chapter 8, Kautsa noted that this Vedic statement contradicts another\). These theistic tendencies came to the fore in later Indic sects or religions and have always been predominant in the monotheistic religions of western Asia. The Rigveda contains nothing like it. It is hardly the same thing when the Bharadvājas, composers of the sixth circle say to Agni: ‘You are our dear guest\!’

The Gītā’s juxtaposition of ritual and knowledge pays no attention to difficulties that philosophers have raised. The two paths are not easily compatible and *karma-phala-tyāga* is not the same as *jñāna*. Early Indic philosophies tried to find and analyse a similar synthesis which they called: *karma-jñāna-samuccaya*. It is a good point of departure for beginning students of Indian philosophy. Śaṇkara tried to solve the difficulty by declaring that *karma* and *jñāna* are intended for different classes of persons.

To illustrate the Upaniṣadic critique of ritual at its best we should not look at early Upaniṣads like the CU or BĀU, which display sparkling new ideas but conform elsewhere to the ritualism of the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas. Such Upaniṣads do not even go as far as a poet in the last circle of the Rigveda:
>
> You will not find him who has created

> Some obstacle is in your way.

> Enveloped by mists and stammering

> Taking life, the reciters wander.

Later Upaniṣads are more radical, e.g., the Muṇḍaka \(with parallels in the Kaṭha and Maitri\):
>
> Unsteady boats are these ritual forms, eighteen in number, in which the inferior karma is said to reside. The fools who delight in this ritual as the highest good go again and again through the cycle of old age and death. Abiding in the midst of ignorance, wise in their own estimate, fancying themselves to be learned but really obtuse, these fools go around in a circle like blind men led by the blind.

The Muṇḍaka is not only radical, it uses a more vernacular form of Sanskrit. That shows that it was popular, not that it was influenced by Jainism or Buddhism, traditions that were first expressed through the medium of a Middle-Indic language. All are critical of ritual, but the Upaniṣadic critique paves the way for *jñāna* and specifies what *jñāna* is knowledge *of*. *Jñāna* is *brahma-jñāna*, ‘knowledge of the absolute,’ the somewhat opaque but convenient English translation of a principle that holds the universe together. Other Upaniṣadic passages declare that that *brahman* is identical with our self \(*ātman*\) and that knowledge is its realization. The universe is one and we are part of it in our inner selves. The question is: how? Light is thrown on this question by a recent discovery.



### ‘In That Way You Are’

We have encountered several meanings of brahman. It means sublime ‘language’ in the early Rigveda and the brahman priest is an officiant attached to the Atharvaveda. In the Upaniṣads, brahman is something entirely different. It cannot be easily defined and its frequent translation as ‘absolute’ does not contradict the fact that it must sometimes be translated as ‘language’. The word *ātman* is even more intractable. Etymologically related to an Indo-European word for ‘breath’ \(German *Athem*, Dutch *adem*\), it is used in Vedic and Sanskrit as a reflexive pronoun for all three genders and persons, as in English: ‘he did it himself’, ‘they went out by themselves’, ‘the book itself says so’. In English, one cannot say ‘the self’ just as one cannot say ‘the we.’ ‘The I’ is only used by philosophers \(psychologists prefer ‘the ego’\). ‘The self’ and ‘the Self’ occur only in English writings on Indian philosophy.

A simple way of formulating the basic identity taught by the Upaniṣads is: ‘I am Brahman’ \(*aham brahmāsmi*\). That insight can only be obtained from a teacher and its oral transmission goes from person to person, not from an individual to a group. It is not obtained by listening to a lecture, let alone reading. It is not really *transmitted* because it arises in the pupil from within. It dawns upon him when he realizes its truth; and *realize* is the proper word because he realizes himself for which he does not need any evidence from outside. The teacher may have prompted it by a silent mantra or a snap of the finger.

The identity of ātman and brahman is expressed by similes, e.g., light. King Janaka asks Yājñavalkya what its source is. He answers: ‘The sun, your Majesty, is the source of light. It is by the light of the sun that a persons sits down, goes about, does his work and returns.’ Not satisfied, the king asks what happens when the sun sets. Yājñavalkya replaces sun by moon and repeats the same phrases. When sun and moon have set, the answer is fire, followed by voice in case the fire has gone out. When voice has stopped, ‘The self is then his own source of light’ followed by the same refrain. But unlike the knowledge of light, the knowledge of self has no specifics. It seems to answer our first question at the beginning of this book about what Yājñavalkya might have had in mind. But if there is no awareness of specifics, what does Yājñavalkya say?

Perhaps another teacher in another Upaniṣad gives the answer. Uddālaka Āruṇi instructs Śvetaketu in the CU \(6.8–16\). He tells him nine stories, each ending with the famous *Tattvamasi.* But its meaning has been misunderstood for two-and-a-half millennia—another example \(after what I wrote about the Atharvaveda and Obeyesekhere’s thesis\) of a major new discovery in the field of Vedic studies. The customary translation of *Tattvamasi* is ‘Thou Art That.’ But in 1986, Joel Brereton pointed out that this interpretation is not in accordance with the rules of Vedic syntax which require that the neuter pronoun *tat* \(‘that’\) cannot refer to the masculine *tvam*, ‘you’ or ‘Thou’. In Vedic, if you want to say ‘You are that,’ you must say: *sa tvam asi*. Since the only other relevant meanings of *tat* are ‘in that way’, ‘therefore’, or some such translation, *Tattvamasi* Ś*vetaketu* must mean: ‘In that way are you, Śvetaketu\!’

Now the context. Uddālaka Āruṇi tries to explain a certain ‘minuteness’ \(*a*ṇ*iman*\). He returns to it nine times, each time starting with a different preliminary. One starts on the previous evening, when he asks his son to put some salt in a container of water and come back the next day. Next morning, he asks him to find the salt in the water but the son cannot find it.

‘Now, take a sip from this corner,’ says the father. ‘How does it taste?’

‘Salty.’

The father tells him to take a sip from the centre and from another corner, and the son gives the same answers. Then follows the famous statement in its context which is made nine times: ‘That which is this finest minuteness, that the whole world has as its self. That is the truth. That is the self. *Tat tvam asi.’*

I have followed Brereton’s translation, replacing his ‘finest essence’ for *a*ṇ*iman* by the more literal: ‘minuteness.’ I thereby avoid the term ‘essence’, which in English means perfume but also substance, the equivalent of Sanskrit *dravya*, a loaded term in Indian as well as European philosophies, from Plato who exalted it to Heidegger and the existentialists who denounced it in discussions, none of them minute.

Could *Tat* refer to *a*ṇ*iman*? It cannot because that word has the masculine gender also. We are left with ‘Therefore you are.’ No one has challenged Brereton’s interpretation, as far as I know. I can think of only one way one could do it. It is far-fetched but not out of the question because some of the great Upanisadic sages were great eccentrics. Uddālaka Āruṇi might have wanted to impress his son by making not only a Great Statement \(*mahākāvya*\) but also an Outrageous Statement, one that rages beyond humdrum grammar. Its meaning would not be clear, like *aham brahmāsmi,* ‘I am *brahman*,’ but ungrammaticality is not unprecedented. The statement of abandon by the patron: *agnaye ida*ṃ *na mama*, ‘this is for Agni, not for me,’ is ungrammatical as we have seen in Chapter 7.

Having seen what Uddālaka Āruṇi said, what did Yājñavalkya have in mind? I am not sure. Things are different from what they seem to. It shows that more work is needed even on the famous great statements \(*mahāvākya*\) of the Upaniṣads.



### Dhyāna, Meditation and the End of the Veda

Whether or not we are brahman and whether or not the ethical dimensions of the *karma* doctrine are Upaniṣadic, the karma doctrine is related to something else that is Indic and goes beyond it: techniques of concentration or meditation \(*dhyāna*, *abhidhyāna*\). They are Vedic because they occur in the early Upaniṣads, but they are found elsewhere, for example in Jainism and Buddhism, where they are referred to by different terms and are often specific meditations on the cycle of rebirth. They spread through Buddhism over large parts of Asia first and of the world now. There is no general agreement about what meditation is and what it is not, but in some senses it is monotheistic and probably universal. It is not something to be discussed in the present context. What is the Vedic context?

The kinds of meditation that concern us are connected with almost all the topics we have treated in the previous chapters and the present. Vedic meditation is the product of a long process of *interiorization*. It started when a fire ritual, the Agnihotra, was interiorized by performing it through breathing. Other rituals came to be performed mentally. In the Soma ritual, there is a ‘mental \(*manasā*\) cup’. Mental performances of Vedic rituals enabled the grammarian Patañjali to declare that ritual is without end like language. Meditation is related to the mental chariots and wheels of the beginning of Chapter 2 and to the Rathakāra, but ritual when interiorized, chant when inaudible, recitation when ineffable and breathing itself, all turned into forms of meditation in later Vedic where they are looked upon as *karma*, that is: an activity. Why? Because they have a beginning and an end. They are not knowledge which is instantaneous, beyond time. But what sounds as recitation or meditation may be knowledge, e.g., of *pūr*ṇ*am*, ‘fullness’. We return to such exceptions in Chapter 14.

The Sāmavedic CU begins with speculations about the *udgītha* chant which culminates in OM. OM unites Rig and Sāman as man and woman unite and satisfy each other’s desires. OM unites A, U and M. Its foundation is ‘the most natural order of sound production: an opening of the mouth followed by its closure’ \(Roman Jakobson\).

Elsewhere the CU meditation \(*dhyāna*\) is one of a long chain of realities, each greater than the preceding one. The Praśna Upaniṣad declares that meditation on the sound A leads to a speedy return to earth; AU jointly together leads to the lunar world, but only AUM leads to the world of brahman \(*brahmaloka*\)—a variation on the traditional doctrine of the paths of the ancestors and that of the gods. The section ends with a corrupt verse or versified speculation:
>
> With Rig stanzas this world;

> With Yajus formulas, the mid-regions;

> With Sāman chants, the poets’ proclaimed place.

> By the support of OM alone does a man attain

> that which is serene, beyond old age

> and death, free from fear, the supreme.

There is no mention of knowledge in these rambling verses. The Chāndogya is close to the Sāmaveda, especially at the beginning where chanting takes precedence over meditation or knowledge. In later sections, the CU and the BĀU draw from ‘the common stock of Upaniṣadic lore’ \(as Patrick Olivelle put it\) and concentrate on knowledge. In Buddhism, meditation had a great future, but it was topped by wisdom which corresponds to the Upaniṣadic knowledge \(Chapter 16, *Sixteen: Buddhism*\). In the middle and later Upaniṣads, knowledge is gradually replaced by epic and religious notions such as salvation and bhakti. The search for salvation signals the Vedānta or end of the Veda.

Another signal of the approaching end is the breakdown of the notion of Vedic school or *śākhā*. I have quoted freely from the CU, the BĀU and other Upaniṣads which belong to different schools. I did not jump around to such an extent in earlier chapters. The breakdown of the schools is not mentioned explicitly in the Upaniṣads, as far as I know, but it is found in other developments during the same period. In grammar, the position of the earlier *Prātiśakhyā* \(‘one for each *śākhā*’\) treatises is eclipsed by Pāṇini’s grammar which is applicable to all, that is, to the Sanskrit language as a whole \(Chapter 14\). There is an echo in the Vedānta or Brahma Sūtra which states that meditation belongs to all schools and is not *prativedam*, ‘one for each Veda’.



### The Two Main Contributions of the Upaniṣads

If I were asked to point at the greatest contributions of the Upaniṣads and the Vedānta, I would mention two. The first is public discussions and rational dialogues without restraints \(e.g., ‘political correctness’\). Rational discussions never existed between the two Jaina sects, who did not talk to each other, but survived in Indian philosophy, in the Buddhist Councils, in the Council of Lhasa that allegedly took place between Indian and Chinese Buddhists, and among Tibetans, though no longer in Tibet itself. In India, they continued to exist in religious contexts, at least until half a century ago in Kanchipuram, when I looked up at the leaders of the two main Viśiṣṭādvaita schools or sects, arguing with each other, high above me on elephant back and surrounded by throngs of followers. The name of one was Prativādam Bhayaṃkaram, ‘Terrible Refutation’. Logic and religion combined in one fantastic spectacle. What a lesson for the twenty-first century\!

The second great contribution of the Upaniṣads goes deeper into the recesses of human thought. It is insight in the nature of knowledge as a guide to what is reality as distinct from the appearances. This kind of insight is different from the literally superficial knowledge to which Behaviourism or Phenomenology aspire, and altogether different from what is believed by many people who have not given the matter much thought. It lies at the heart of modern science, whether it is theoretical physics or genetics, which is a search for features of reality that are hidden. The general theory of relativity, quantum theory or the theory of DNA, all deal, or dealt in their original form, with ‘things’ that lie behind and beyond the appearances. They are not enumerations of facts; they are not *sa*ṃ*khyā* or ‘enumeration’, they are *theories.* A simple example comes from the theory of heat: what appears to us as heat, viz. the appearances, is due to the movement of particles, viz. the underlying reality. The faster the particles move, the hotter it feels to us. The phenomena or appearances are studied in another science: thermodynamics. Though it deals with appearances, it is not superficial: it led to the discovery of entirely new concepts such as *entropy*.

Many philosophers, worldwide, have made the distinction between reality and appearance. The Upaniṣads do so throughout. The Muṇḍaka distinguished explicitly between a lower and a higher knowledge. The Advaita Vedānta thrives on it. The Platonic tradition is its European counterpart, but with an important difference to which I return in a moment. Other philosophers have felt uneasy about something that appeared to them to be metaphysical. But it is not meta-physical: like all theoretical science, it is meta-phenomenological. It seeks true knowledge behind the phenomena.

Even brilliant thinkers have been deceived. Young Bertrand Russell took on the bastion of Hegelian thought in the form it was defended by a British Hegelian, F.H. Bradley, whose chief work was entitled *Appearance and Reality*. Russell had a good time with it. Bradley wrote before Einstein, but not before Maxwell’s *Theory of Electromagnetics*, Marx, Freud or Darwin, all pointing at realities behind the appearances. Russell, primarily a logician and mathematician, did not realize at the time, that those discoveries were about concealed realities. That was discovered by the Upaniṣads as it was by Plato. Modern civilization would not exist without it.

The Upaniṣadic insight is deep and speculative but we should not be blind to its limitations. It tells us that the world as it appears is not real, but does not explain how it comes about; Śaṇkara declared that it could not be done. Science demonstrates that it can be done though it is not final. That, of course, is obvious to everyone who gives it some thought; though there are scientists who do not seem to understand it themselves.

That the theories of theoretical physics are theories does not mean that anything goes: they are highly confirmed. According to Roger Penrose, Newton’s theory of gravity is accurate to one part in 107 and Einstein’s General Relativity to one part in 1014. In the Upaniṣad, *jñāna* is not so confirmed. Vedic sciences were improved upon by later scientists. Later Indic thought stressed the opposite: regress all the way down from the *Satyayūga.* Perhaps it can apply somewhere, I am unsure about ethics and/or moral or immoral behaviour, but if there is progress anywhere it is in knowledge. The history of science has demonstrated it. It does not imply that Keppler or Einstein deserve more respect than Yājñavalkya or Śākalya but millennia have intervened. If my book has succeeded in showing that it makes a difference because history does, I shall be pleased.

That book has come to its own Vedānta, but not to its end: it has reached the end of the long development that led to the canonization of the compositions that are listed and related to each other in Table I. Though there is much I have ignored or neglected, we have reached the end of the Veda. What remains to be done?

We must look at the forest behind the trees. With so much material on our hands that has not yet been explained, we have to turn to a more analytical form of exposition and try to find out whether it may assist our understanding.



