+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1-7]. On the full-moon day of (the month) râvaa, let him carry forward fire from his house, and let him besmear (the place around it) to the extent of more than one prakrama (i.e. step) towards the different directions (of the horizon).

[^1-7]: 2, 1-7. 14. 15 = III, 7.

## 02
2. Having once taken a quantity of flour, and having put it into (the spoon called) Darvi, he should pour out water on the besmeared place to the east (of the fire), and should offer a Bali with (the formula), (O king of serpents) dwelling towards the east' (MB. II, 1, 1),

## 03
3. He should pour out the rest of the water.

## 04
4. Having touched water, he should do the same

[^p. 412]

towards the other directions (of the horizon) according as they are mentioned in the Mantras.

## 05
5. Between (the besmeared surface) towards the south and that towards the east and the fire (there should be) a passage.

## 06
6. After he has thrown the remnants (of flour) out of the basket into the fire, he should go from (the fire) which has been carried forward, to that (fire) which has not (been carried forward), and should turn his hands downwards (so as to touch the earth with them) and should murmur (the Mantra), 'Adoration to the earth's' (l.l. 3).

## 07
7. Thence rising he should place (to the north of the fire) a bunch of Darbha-grass with (the Mantra), 'The king Soma' (l.l.4), and should fix his thoughts on the serpents that are in that bunch.

## 8 
8 [^8-13]. Taking a portion of fried grain, he should go out of the village in a northern or eastern direction, and should sacrifice it with his joined hands with the four (verses), 'Hearken, Râkâ!' (MB. II, 6, 2 seqq.).

[^8-13]: 8-13 = IV, 8, 1 seqq. (to deest).

## 09
9. Walking eastwards he should murmur, 'Be a giver of wealth' (l.l. 6).

## 10
10. Thus three times to the different quarters and intermediate quarters (of the horizon).

[^p. 413]

## 11
11. Looking upwards (he should offer a Bali) to the hosts of divine beings,

## 12
12. (Looking) towards the side, to the hosts of other beings;

## 13
13. Looking downwards, he should go back (to the fire) without looking back, and should eat the fried grain.

## 14
14. On the following day he should prepare flour of fried grain, should put it into a new vessel, and after sunset he should offer Balis.

## 15
15. (The same is repeated every day) till the Âgrahâyaî day.

## 16 
16 [^16-33]. On the full-moon day of Praushapada (or) under (the Nakshatra) Hasta they should begin the Veda-study;

[^16-33]: 16-33 = III, 3 (22, 25, 29, 33 desunt).

## 17
17. On the full-moon day of râvaa, according to some (teachers).

## 18
18. Having sacrificed as at the Upanayana - 

## 19
19. He should cause (the students) to recite the Sâvitrî,

## 20
20. (The verse), 'Soma, the king' (Sâma-veda I, 91), and the first verses of the Parvans.

## 21
21. Let them eat grain and curds with two appropriate (verses).

## 22
22. On the following day in the morning let them repeat (the Veda) to their pupils.

[^p. 414]

## 23
23. (After each section of the text) they should repeat (as a sort of index?) the beginnings of the as and the Prastâvas (of the Sâmans).

## 24
24. Then the Rahasya texts are chanted,

## 25
25. Except when lightning is seen or thunder heard.

## 26
26. When they have studied four months and a half, they finish on the full-moon day of Pausha.

## 27
27. From that time studying is forbidden when clouds appear,

## 28
28. And when lightning is seen, or thunder heard, or when it is drizzling.

## 29
29. When these three things happen together, (studying is forbidden) till the twilight has thrice passed.

## 30
30. On an Ashakâ, on a new-moon day, on the (three) festivals which come once in four months, and at (the beginning of) the northern course of the sun, (studying is forbidden) for one night with one day before and one day after it.

## 31
31. And if a fellow-pupil has died.

## 32
32. On the falling of a meteor, or after an earthquake, or an eclipse of the sun or of the moon, on these occasions one should know (that studying is forbidden) until the same time next day.

## 33
33. The Kaas and Kauthumas, however, state

[^p. 415]

that (when rain has fallen, studying is forbidden) as long as the water stands in the ditches.

