+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1-15]. On the full-moon day of Âvayua milk-rice sacred to Rudra (is prepared).

[^1-15]: 3, 1-15 = Gobhila III, 8 (3 deest).

## 02
2. He should offer it with (the Mantra), 'Not to our children.'

## 03
3. Let him pour Âya into milk; this is called a Pshâtaka.

## 04
4. Therewith he should besprinkle the cows when they have come home, with (the Mantra), 'May Mitra and Varua' (Sâma-veda I, 220).

## 05
5. That night he should let the calves join their mothers.

## 06
6. At the sacrifice of the first-fruits, milk-rice sacred to Indra and Agni (is prepared).

## 07
7. Let him sacrifice Âya with the four (verses), 'To the bearer of the hundred weapons' (MB. II, 1, 9 seqq.),

## 08
8. And afterwards with (the verse), 'May Agni eat' (l.l. 15).

## 09
9. All of them who have received the initiation, should eat the remainder of that (sacrificial food).

## 10
10. Having 'spread under' water, he should cut off two portions of the new fruits.

[^p. 416]

## 11
11. Three (portions are cut off) by descendants of Bhgu.

## 12
12. Over (these portions) water (is poured).

## 13
13. He should swallow (some part of that food) three times without chewing it, with (the Mantra), 'From the good' (l.l. 13);

## 14
14. Or at (the partaking of) barley with (the Mantra), 'This barley' (l.l. 16).

## 15
15. With (the Mantra), This art thou' (l.l. 14), let him touch the different sense-organs at his head.

## 16 
16 [^16-31]. The Âgrahâyaa ceremony has been explained by the râvaa (ceremony).

[^16-31]: 16-31 = III, 9 and 10, 1-17 (29 deest).

## 17
17. Let him (not?) murmur (the Mantra), 'Adoration to the Earth' (see chap. 2, 6).

## 18
18. In the evening let him make an oblation of milk-rice with (the verse), 'As the first' (MB. II, 2, 1).

## 19
19. Turning downwards his two hands (so as to touch the sacrificial grass) he should murmur (the Mantra), 'In worldly strength' (l.l. 2, 3).

## 20
20. Having spread out to the west of the fire a layer of northward-pointed grass, so that it is inclined towards the north, the householder sits down on that layer,

## 21
21. (And) the other persons in due order.

## 22
22. Then, without an interval, their wives,

[^p. 417]

## 23
23. And their children.

## 24
24. The householder, turning his hands downwards (so as to touch the layer of grass), should murmur (the Mantra), 'Be soft' (l.l. 4).

## 25
25. When he has finished that (verse), they should lie down on their right sides. They should turn round three times, turning themselves towards themselves (i.e. turning round forwards, not backwards, and thus returning to their former position?).

## 26
26. Let them repeat the auspicious hymns.

## 27
27. Then let them do what they like.

## 28
28. The eighth days of the three dark fortnights after the Âgrahâyaî are called the Ashakâs.

## 29
29. On (each of) these a mess of cooked food (is sacrificed),

## 30
30. And eight cakes on the first.

## 31
31. These he should bake in a dish without turning them round.

## 32 
32 [^32-33]. On the last (Ashakâ) vegetables (are offered). (So also) at the Anvâhârya (râddha).

[^32-33]: 32, 33 = IV, 4, 17. 21.

## 33
33. Let him sacrifice with (the formula), 'To the Ashakâ Svâhâ!'

