+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1-13]. On the middle (Ashakâ) a cow (is sacrificed).

[^1-13]: 4, 1-13 = Gobhila III, 10, 18 seqq.

[^p. 418]

## 02
2. He should place that (cow) to the east of the fire, facing the west, and should sacrifice (Âya) with (the verse), 'What, O beasts' (MB. II, 2, 5).

## 03
3. After having made that oblation he should recite over (the cow the verse), 'May to thee' (l.l. 6).

## 04
4. Let him sprinkle it with water in which barley is, with (the formula), 'Agreeable to the Ashakâ I sprinkle thee!'

## 05
5. Having sprinkled it and carried a fire-brand round it, he should give the Prokshaî water (to the cow) to drink.

## 06
6. Going in a northern direction (from the fire) he should kill (the cow), the head of which is turned to the west, the feet to the north.

## 07
7. After it has been killed, he should sacrifice (Âya) with (the verse), 'If the beast' (l.l. 8).

## 08
8. His wife should wash the apertures of its body.

## 09
9. After (the cow's body) has been opened, so that two purifiers (i.e. grass-blades) have been put under (the knife), he should have the omentum drawn out.

## 10
10. Seizing it with one branch and with another forked branch of a sacrificially pure tree he should roast it.

## 11
11. When it has ceased to drop, he should hew (the cow) to pieces.

[^p. 419]

## 12
12. The 'spreading under' and sprinkling (Âya) on (the omentum) has been described. (It is clone) as at the Svishakt oblation (see II, 1, 24).

## 13
13. He should sacrifice with (the formula), 'To the Ashakâ Svâhâ!'

## 14 
14 [^14-24]. The Avadânas (or portions which have to be cut off) he should have taken from all its limbs.

[^14-24]: 14-24 = IV, I, 3-17.

## 15
15. Not from the left thigh and the lungs.

## 16
16. The left thigh he keeps (for the Anvashakya).

## 17
17. He should cook the Avadânas and a mess of sacrificial food, (stirring up the ones and the other) with two different pot-ladles.

## 18
18. The juice he lets drop into a brazen vessel.

## 19
19. The Avadânas he puts on branches of the Plaksha tree.

## 20
20. From each (Avadâna) he should cut off (the prescribed portions, and should put them) into a brazen vessel;

## 21
21. And from the mess of cooked food.

## 22
22. Let him take four portions or eight portions of Âya (?) and let him sacrifice it with (the verses), 'Into Agni' (MB. II, 2, 9 seqq.).

## 23
23. Let him make oblations out of the brazen vessel, each oblation with two of the following (verses).

[^p. 420]

## 24
24. The oblation to (Agni) Svishakt with the eighth (verse).

## 25 
25 [^25-28]. At a sacrifice to the Fathers the omentum is sacrificed with (the verse), 'Carry the omentum' (MB. II, 3, 16).

[^25-28]: 25-28 = IV, 4, 22-24 (29 deest).

## 26
26. At one to the gods with (the verse), 'âtavedas!' (l.l. 17.)

## 27
27. If (the deity is) unknown, (in the formula for) assigning (the oblation, instead of the name of a deity the name of) that (ceremony is put) - 

## 28
28. As (for instance), 'To the Ashakâ.'

## 29
29. An animal is the sacrificial fee at (the sacrifice of) an animal;

## 30 
30 [^30]. A full vessel at (that of) a mess of cooked food.

[^30]: 30 = 1, 9, 6. 10.

