+++
title = "02 The Exclusion of Śrauta from Anthropology in English"

+++

We have mainly looked at Śrauta rituals \(*Seven: Yajurveda*\) which are described in the Śrauta Sūtras. The other important component of *kalpa* are the Gṛhya or ‘domestic’ rites which include birth, initiation, marriage, funeral ceremonies and other life-cycle ceremonies. They were not included in Table 1 \(*Four: The Four Vedas*\) but incorporate the *upanayana* ceremony of which we needed an approximate idea because it provided the ritual background and context for the Gāyatrī mantra. One reason for the exclusion of life-cycle ceremonies from the present account of Vedic ritual is that these types of ceremony occur worldwide. Though their forms vary greatly, their social functions and significance are well understood since Arnold van Gennep whose ideas were developed by a group of British, American, and other anthropologists that include Victor Turner, Mary Douglas, Clifford Geertz and others. Life-cycle ceremonies may be explained in terms of boundaries that are crossed. I shall confine myself to the Śrauta rituals not only because they are, in Vedic India, more basic, but also because they cannot be explained with the help of the conceptual machinery of these anthropologists. It is here that the theories of ritual of many scholars of religion and of social scientists, especially in the English-speaking world, break down. The other reasons for not including the domestic rituals here is that the only remarkable features they possess beyond ‘liminality’ are influenced by or modelled on Śrauta rites.

Claude Lévi-Strauss could have made a great contribution were it not for the fact that he, perhaps wisely, excluded Indic materials almost entirely from the data on which his work was based. There is one apparent exception: in the 1950s, Lévi-Strauss did fieldwork in East Pakistan, among Buddhists of the Chittagong area. Unlike Obeyesekhere, whose work exudes lifelong familiarity with Sri Lankan Buddhism, Lévi-Strauss gave the Burmese surface a good scratch: he interpreted their ‘Buddhism’ as if it were a kind of Protestantism, neglecting the Mahāyāna which is or was part of Buddhism both in Sri Lanka and Myanmar. We shall return to these distinctions in Part V.

Lévi-Strauss could have made a contribution to the understanding of Śrauta rites because he had the basic background. He knew that appearance and reality are not the same thing. He attributed that insight, common to Plato and the Upaniṣads \(Chapter 10\), to his knowledge of geology and his familiarity with Marx. But he was also inspired by the distinctive features that the linguist Roman Jakobson had introduced in phonology. It might have opened new vistas and may still do so, if a modern student combines these insights with the study of Śrauta ritual.

One reason for the failure of modern anthropologists and other social scientists in the English-speaking world to come to terms with Śrauta rites is that they failed to see that the authors of the ritual Sūtras also had theories as they did themselves. That failure is surprising since the road was paved in 1899 by two French scientists: Henry Hubert and Marcel Mauss.

According to Mauss, Hubert did most of the work. It is unlikely because the cooperation between these two in a number of publications was remarkably close. Marcel Mauss was the greater scientist. He was the son-in-law of Emile Durkheim, the leader of French sociology until his death in 1917 when Mauss took over. In France, sociology is a serious and important subject which includes the study of civilization, the history of religions and much else. Sociological journals such as *L’Année Sociologique* are read not only by university professors but discussed by intellectuals. One of Mauss’s most famous books that he published under his own name was ‘An Essay on the Gift’. What enhances his importance to Vedic studies is that he had studied with the brilliant Sanskritist Sylvain Lévi who taught him a course on Vedic ritual in which he was the only student. The work that was published by Hubert and Mauss in 1899 incorporates these studies. Its first part, an ‘Essay on the Nature and Function of Ritual,’ is chiefly based upon Vedic and Jewish rites but provides what is perhaps the most serious sociological and anthropological study of ritual. Does it provide us with meanings?

It does not but the reader may wonder whether contemporary performances, more within the purview of anthropologists, may not provide those very meanings that have eluded us so far. T.P. Mahadevan and I have studied such performances and, not surprisingly, found that meanings are assigned to these performances and some of their elements or features. However, they reflect belief systems with which the rituals have nothing to do. That does not only apply to anachronistic interpretations of Vedic ritual in terms of ‘Hinduism’, but also to Vedic myths such as we have touched upon in Part II. In other words, rituals are like mantras: they tend to remain the same but interpretations change. That includes Vedic myths that are not invoked by the Śrauta Sūtras, but by Brāhmaṇas and modern scholars. Even in Vedic times, experts agree that Vedic ritual had little to do with Vedic mythology. According to Renou: ‘Vedic religion is first and foremost a liturgy, and only secondarily a mythological or speculative system; we must therefore investigate it as a liturgy.’ R.N. Dandekar wrote in a similar vein: ‘The Rigvedic mythology can be shown to have hardly any relation to the ‘solemn’ \(i.e. *śrauta*\) ritual.’

Sometimes interpretations change rituals. This seems to apply especially to more recent or contemporary performances. When it was no longer believed that the ritual patron and the sacrificial animals would attain heaven, and when not only the Jainas but society in general condemned the ritual killing, or any killing of animals, goats were replaced by substitutes in South Indian Vedic ritual as we described in AGNI, our account of the 1975 performance of an Agnicayana. Robert Sharf has studied a more radical development in the Japanese Shingon ritual, which is related to the Vedic \(ladles of the same shape are used, for example\) and where theologians have for many centuries discussed and added to traditional rituals. Semantic content clearly mattered. Do the Japanese like adding—Indic syllabaries to Kanji characters without choosing like the Koreans—to some extent? I like Sharf’s emphasis on powerful and mysterious forces. I doubt psychology or sociology, as I know them, will assist, but it is obvious that these discussions have not come to an end.


