+++
title = "05 Human Sacrifice"

+++

Most Śrauta rituals require the sacrifice of goats. In the Puruṣa poem, the animal is human and it raises the question: did human sacrifice exist in India? We might start with the noun *medha* which refers in the Rigveda to the juice of meat or the marrow and later to any animal sacrifice. The term *puruṣamedha*, coined like *aśvamedha* or horse sacrifice, is mentioned in the Yajur- and Atharva Brāhmaṇas. The Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa is quite explicit on it and how could it not? There is nothing with which the Brāhmaṇas do *not* deal, as we have seen. In 1882, the learned translator of these texts, Julius Eggeling, had some worthwhile things to say on them.

The first is that the *puruṣamedha* is always treated as a symbolic, not an actual performance. That is not due to the fact that Professor Eggeling would be scandalized by this because he isn’t, not even by their ‘flimsy symbolism’ which he compared to the ‘speculative vapourings of the Gnostics’. He takes up the *puruṣamedha* first in a footnote where he crosses daggers with his old teacher, the famous Albrecht Weber, one of the great Vedic scholars of the nineteenth century, brother of the still more famous sociologist Max Weber. Albrecht had written that the would-be victims ‘may possibly at one time have been intended to be all of them slaughtered.’ Julius retorts, as a good pupil should his teacher, that that supposition ‘can hardly have been meant seriously. One might as well suppose that, at the *aśvamedha*, all the “evil-doers” who, according to Kātyāyana, are to bathe in the river, “were meant to be drowned”.’

According to Eggeling, the ‘human sacrifice’ was a theoretical scheme intended to complete the system.

Another argument, perhaps more straightforward is: if the ritual system included human sacrifice, it would lead to cannibalism, since the patron and his priests eat the omentum of the animal that is slaughtered, whether it is a goat \(the common option\) or a horse. No patron would want to be responsible for cannibalism and no participant would consent to engage in it either.

The two Eggeling arguments I have just sketched have an ethical ring about them. Perhaps the Vedas had no ethics. This is more or less Obeyesekhere’s thesis \(*Ten: Upaniṣads*\). Eggeling’s third argument has no such ring and is based upon straightforward philology and textual analysis. The only two Sūtras that describe the *puruṣamedha*, of the Śāṇkhāyana and Vaitāna schools, are in all details copies or adaptations of descriptions of the *aśvamedha* which had no existence in and by itself. I believe that is the best of Eggeling’s arguments but one must know something about the *aśvamedha* which I have not so far mentioned.

Performances of the horse-sacrifice have been popular because it is a royal ritual, meant to expand the king’s territory. It is mentioned in inscriptions, mostly read by scholars, but was popular in the Mahābhārata. Its popularity survives in Varanasi, where the central and most famous ghāt is called *daśāśvamedha*, not because there was a ‘Ten Horse Sacrifice’ \(as Diana Eck writes\), but because there were supposed to have been ten performances of the *aśvamedha* that ended there.

A special reason for the popularity of the *aśvamedha* is that it is not a ritual only for a king. It is a king whose queen has to lie next to the horse, covered by some kind of garment, a symbolic act since the horse is dead.

A final word about the terms ‘ritual’ and ‘sacrifice’. I have proposed to distinguish them from each other by using ‘ritual’ for the general category and reserving ‘sacrifice’ for a ritual in which an animal is ritually killed. I am not the first who made a distinction between the two terms. Albrecht Weber, whom I just mentioned, took the general meaning of Hotā to be ‘sacrificer’, not just ‘priest’. The verbal root from which Hotā is derived means either ‘sacrifice’ or ‘invoke’. According to Renou, the name of the Hotā priest must be connected with sacrifice, not invocation. J.C. Heesterman, from whom I learned a great deal about Vedic ritual, used ‘ritual’ in earlier publications, notably in his ‘Essays on Indian Ritual, Kingship and Society’ that are widely known as *The Inner Conflict of Tradition*. Later he published *The Broken World of Sacrifice* with the subtitle ‘An Essay in Ancient Indian Ritual’. The Introduction of that book begins with the lapidary statement: ‘Sacrifice seems to be out of fashion. In anthropology, where once it was an important theme, it seems to have fallen in disuse, if not disrepute.’ Heesterman maintains the distinction and his book describes ritualism as the total subjection of sacrifice to the rule of ritual.

Despite a massive amount of solid data, ever increasing in number, and an ever-expanding discussion that has engaged many top-class minds, my present chapter remains open-ended. I have tried to give an idea of some of the conceptual problems that bedevil the understanding of mantras and ritual, but we have not reached the core, let alone the end. The powers of mantras and ritual seem to be beyond the grasp of the human and social sciences and have not been explained by contemporary scholars or scientists. The same holds for meditation which is closely related to recitation and chant; and for bird song as we have already seen.

I conclude that we may with equanimity and for the time being, pay no serious attention to the ponderous ruminations and platitudes of some of our contemporaries. I prefer Yājñavalkya’s explanation of mantras, which may also apply to rituals: their power comes from the sun. He may also have accepted the Chāndogya claim that the sun, in its circular movements, makes the sound OM. Though I live in the country, I have been unable to hear it, but since most of the energy available on our planet comes from the sun in any case, Yājñavalkya’s explanation, while insufficiently precise, lacking in intelligible detail and certainly incomplete, is basically correct.



