+++
title = "03 02"

+++

‘Oral traditions provide us with information on localities and civilization …’ : Falk 1981 on ruins.

‘Figure 7 provides us with small models of toy carts’ : Kenoyer in *Rad und Wagen*. Mackay, R. and R.E.M. Wheeler. 1938. *Further Excavations at Mohenjo Daro*. Delhi: The Archaeological Survey of India. Chariots in the Near East: Richter 2004.

‘The Rigveda derives from the terminology of chariots and spokes’ : RV 1.164.11 which will be quoted on *pp.* 334–5.

‘Connections have been sought … but these pots do not provide pictorial representations … as on Greek vases’ : Williams, Dyfri. 1985. *Greek Vases*. British Museum: British Museum Press, e.g., Figure 12 which depicts a ‘Chariot Approaching Archer’ from about 1350–1300 BCE and is not unlike Figure 10 in this book.

‘The one with lion capitals from Sarnath’ and ‘It comes from the gateways of the Sanchi Stupa’ : illustrations are common. ‘Figure 10 illustrates such an occasion … from Morhana Pahar in Mirzapur’: Sparreboom 1985: 84 after Allchin. B. 1958. ‘Morhana-Pahar: A Rediscovery’. *Man* 58: 153–5.

‘Sintashta’ : Genning, V.F., G.B. Zdanovich and V.V. Genning. 1992. *Sintashta. Archaeological Sites of Aryan Tribes of the Ural-Kazakh Steppes* \(in Russian\). Chelyabinsk: Yuzhno-Ural’sko knizhnoe izdatel’stvo; Witzel 2000: 283–6.

‘It comes from Krivoe-Ozero which is north of Odessa’ : Carpelan c.s. 2001 with dates on page 129.

‘In the east, they easily went from Mongolia into China’ : Mair 2003; Lubotsky 1998.

‘These tracks seem to have been used throughout history …’ : Klimburg-Salter, Deborah E. \(ed.\), 1985. *The Silk Route and the Diamond Path. Esoteric Buddhist Art on the Trans-Himalayan Trade Routes*. Los Angeles: UCLA Art Council; Staal 1986. ‘In the Realm of the Buddha’, *Natural History* 95: 34–45; Staal 2004. *Drie Bergen en Zeven Rivieren*. Amsterdam: J.M. Meulenhoff \(Chapter 10\). Khotan: \# 27.

‘The only people who did it, as far as I know, are Sir Francis Younghusband and his Balti guides’ : French 1994 \(excellent and often amusing\).—‘From there one might go straight south and cross the Indus …’: Klimburg, Maximilian. 1985. ‘The Western Trans-Himalayan Crossroads’ in Klimburg-Salter, p. 34.

‘I shall mention two of these languages and cultures here … Kafiri … and … Kalasha’ : Witzel 2004a: 604–15.—‘Asko Parpola found about 340 campsites …’: Parpola in Carpelan-Parpola 2001. Grierson, who initiated the Linguistic Survey of India at the beginning of the nineteenth century, regarded Kafiri as a branch of Dardic. Since Independence, the *Census of India* made great strides forwards but in 1969, a world-wide survey of *Current Trends in Linguistics*, declared in its fifth volume by mouth of Braj Kachru \(Sebeok 1969: 286\), that the final status of the Dardic family was still undecided. However, the Census report of 1961 had made it clear that ‘the Kafir and Kowar groups of speakers have their main concentration outside the Indian territory’ \(Sebeok 1969: 287, *note* 23\). The future of Kalasha is much more endangered. At the time of writing this note \(August 2007\), a journalist quotes a Kalasha woman: ‘The Taliban are motivated by George Bush’s war on terror. The boys go through a form of military training. It is brainwashing and when they finish they believe they are defending their own culture’ \(source withheld\).

‘Bolan may reflect the name of the Vedic tribe *Bhalāna*’ : it has the typical BMAC structure of ‘trisyllabic words with long middle syllable’: Lubotsky 2001, p. 305. *Ha* turning into *o* is equally common.—‘After crossing the Bolan Pass … one reaches Pirak’: \#29.—‘In the same neighbourhood lies Mehrgarh’: Jarrige, J.F. and M. Le Chevallier. 1979; ‘Excavations and Mehrgarh, Baluchistan. Their Significance in the Context of the Indo-Pakistan Borderlands’ in Taddei, M. Naples: 463–535.

‘The use of “Aryan” is a more serious matter …’ : On the Iranian see Bailey, H.W. 1959. ‘Iranian arya and daha,’ *Transactions of the Philological Society*: 71–115. Burrow, T. 1973. *The Sanskrit Language*. London: Faber and Faber, p. 390, provides quotations on *ārya* as applied to the language of the Indo-Aryans from Sāṣkhāyana Āraṇyaka 8.9 and Aitareya Āraṇyaka 3.2.5. ‘Madhav Deshpande has shown …’: Deshpande 1999. On ‘Hindu’ see Stall 2008c.


