+++
title = "04"

+++

‘Yājñavalkya is said to have received his mantras directly from the Sun’ : a theme of the Chandogya Upaniṣad with respect to OM; below, *pp.* 127–8.

‘The Bharata chieftains are portrayed as practitioners of a multilateral policy’ : Witzel 1997b: 262–4. The names of Bharatas, Kurus, Pañcalas and others are recited during performances of Vedic ritual: below, *p.* 75. *Bharat* did not only become the name of India but spread with Vedic fire rites over large parts of Asia as the name of one of the fires: Strickmann, Michel. 1983. ‘Homa in East Asia’ in Staal, CV and Itti Ravi 1983, II: 418–55 records various forms: *Pitara* in Japan \(which has nothing to do with ‘fathers’\), *Baratha* in Tibet, etc.:

‘In the case of the Kurus, this region was the dictrict of Meerut …’ : Witzel 1997: 267. ‘Leading historians of India are not in full agreement about what kind of structure’: Stein 1998: 59–61; Kulke and Rothermund 1998: 49–50; Thapar 20: 138.

‘Each school \(*śākhā*\) goes back to … a particular area’ : Witzel 1997:304.—‘The Yajurveda invokes Soma as a guide against hostilities’: Caland and Henry 1906–07, Vol. I, p. 110, *note* 106.6.

‘The Padapāṭha was the work of a great scholar and scientist’ : insightful studies include Jha, V. N. 1973, Deshpande 2002.

‘Nor did he know that his Padapāṭha was creating a paradigm’ : Raghavan 1957, Deshpande 2002 studies further variations \(*vikṛ**ti*\)—‘The Apotheosis of Schools’: Renou 1947.

‘It is the linchpin of the system, the *ratha*-derived metaphor used by Romila Thapar’ : above *p.* 72.

‘The Four Vedas’ was originally inspired by the Table ‘Tableau des écoles védiques’ in Renou, Louis et Jean Filliozat. 1947. *L’inde classique. Manuel des etudes indiennes*. I:310–11. Paris : Payot; adapted in Staal, CV and Itti Ravi, 1983, I: 36 and further adapted here.

‘They include the youngsters that will be the ritual experts of to-morrow’ : Mahadevan and Staal 2003, 2005.

‘I can do no better than end with a quote’ : Octavio Paz 1995: 91.


