+++
title = "03"

+++

‘It begins to be visible in late Vedic works and in the Post-Vedic *Dharma Sūtras …* and … in the law book of Manu’ : Olivelle 1999 and 2004 are the most recent and reliable translations into English. For Dharma in Indic civilization from the Vedas onward: Olivelle, Patrick. \(ed.\), 2004, Special Issue of the *Journal of Indian Philosophy* 32/5–6: 421–870. \#335. ‘Nor is there evidence for ‘free Aryans and subjugated indigenous people’: Kulke and Rothermund 1998: 34, 39.

‘Promote the *bráhman …’* : RV 8.35, quoted and translated in a similar context in Gonda 1963a: 120.

‘Vedic society is much more complex than the simplistic triads that Dumézil suggest … the critique of John Brough’ : Dumézil 1958 and Brough 1959.

‘I am referring to the ‘Hymn to Puruṣa’ \(RV 10.90\)’ : during the Fourth International Vedic Workshop which I attended at the University of Texas, Austin \(*Preface,* xxix\), Stanley Insler told me that according to Paul Mus, RV 10.90 was the latest addition to the Rigveda; but his ideas were never published.

‘The Taittirīya Saṃhitā of the Black Yajurveda mentions *k*ṣ*atṛ*’ : Kane, Pandurang Vaman. 1930–1962. *History of Dharmaśāstra \(Ancient and Mediaeval Religious and Civil Law\).* Vols. I–V in seven parts. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. II, Part I, p. 41.

‘Three stages of this process may be distinguished’: Rau 1997. ‘Rathakara’ : a more detailed study, *Rathakāra Manasā*, is forthcoming in the Proceedings of the Fourth International Vedic Workshop at the University of Texas, Austin \(see *Preface* above *page* xxx\). Earlier on Rathakara: Minkowski 1989a.

‘The term *rathakāra*, which becomes prominent later …’ : Kane. 1941. *History of Dharmaśāstra*. II, 1, p. 21.

‘Wilhem Rau tells us that during the *Brāhma*ṇ*a* period, the *rathakāra* owned palatial residences’ : Rau 1957:112. ‘Hertha Krick makes the same mistakes as Kane’: 1982. *Das Ritual der Feuergründung* \(Agnyādheya\). Wien: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften: 44.

‘According to Manu’s post-Vedic book of laws, women are eligible to perform rites but without reciting the accompanying mantras’ : Manu 9.18, which seems to go further in Olivelle’s translation: ‘No rite is performed for women with the recitation of mantras.’


