+++
title = "06 05"

+++

‘Other Vedic compositions … about which Renou wrote: ‘One cannot grasp’ : Renou 1953: 34.

‘The anthology by Wendy Doniger remains the most accessible’ : Doniger 1981. On Wendy herself: Doniger 1998.—‘The reader who wants more and knows German’: Geldner \(1951, 1957\) and \#352.—‘Renou has also translated most of the hymns in French’: Renou \(1955–69\).—‘No one can find anything without the concordance’: Rau \(1969\). Now see also: Brereton and Jamison \(above, *Preface:* xxix\).

‘The most important Vedic gods …’ : no mention is made of the Adityas: Brereton 1981. Gonda 1960, Vol. I provides general accounts of Vedic deities.

‘The poem is on the theme of unification’ : RV 10.191.

‘Dāsa and Dasyu, terms used of enemies …’ and ‘Sambara has been interpreted as an Austro-Asiatic name …’ : speculations are numerous, e.g., Parpola, Asko. 1997. ‘The Dasas and the Coming of the Aryans’ in: Witzel, \(ed.\): 193–202.—‘SOMA’: Thompson 2003.

‘The best Soma comes from Mount Mūjavat:’ \#28. ‘Doniger enumerates more than 140 theories’ : Doniger O’Flaherty 1968.—‘Wasson introduced a fresh and new approach’: Wasson 1968.

‘Wasson’s work was reviewed by … the leading Vedicists of the day’ : Bailey’s evaluations have changed over time and are published in several inaccessible places starting with Bailey, H. W. 1974. ‘The Range of Colour ZAR in Khotan Saka Texts’. *Mémorial: Jean de Mensace*. Louvain: Fondation Culturelle Iranienne: 369–374.—‘Daniel Ingalls of Harvard’: Daniel H.H. 1971. ‘Remarks on Mr. Wasson’s *Soma*.’ *Journal of the American Oriental Society* 91:188–91. —‘F.B.J. Kuiper of Leiden’: 1970. ‘Review of *Soma. Divine Mushroom of Immortality’. Indo-Iranian Journal* 12: 279–85. ‘John Brough of London’: Brough 1971.

‘The next major contribution’ : Flattery and Schwartz 1989. ‘No unanimous conclusion’: Falk 1989.

‘There is no myth, no past, no need for harmony’ : Ingalls’ review \(\#99\), p. 191.—‘A Speculative Poem’: Brereton 1999.

‘Tatiana Elizarenkova has quoted them’ : Elizarenkova 1997.

‘Of course, a good rationalist respects the facts and a good empiricist respects logic’ : Wujastyk, D., 1998. ‘Science and Vedic Studies’, *Journal of Indian Philosophy* 26/4: 335–45:343: ‘If Vedic study and research is to be successful, it must proceed on trustworthy lines, asking important historical questions, and always taking care to remain watchful, original, rigorous and objectively testable.’ \# 275.


