+++
title = "07"

+++

‘Sāyaṇa, a scholar of a deep and wide-ranging knowledge’ : Renou 1947: 9 quotes Sāyaṇa’s words from his commentary on the Taittiriya Saṃhita: *bhittisthānīyo yajurvedaś citrasthānīyāv itarau*.—‘Stephen Lindquist is right that we should sometimes’: Stephen Lindquist ‘On Shattered Heads and Daft Robbers: Rethinking Sakalya in BĀU 3’, forthcoming, in Proceedings of the Fourth International Vedic Workshop at the University of Texas, Austin \(see *Preface,* xxx\).

‘He \(Harold Bailey\) once made a passing suggestion’ : 1984. ‘Vedic *kṣumpa*—and connected data.’ Joshi, S.D. \(ed.\), *Amṛ**tadhārā: Prof. R.N. Dandekar Felicitation Volume*. Delhi: 17–20.

‘Revere Memory\!’ : CU 7.13.1 \(*smaram upāssva*\).

‘He looks like a great sage rather than an insignificant ascetic’ : different versions as described by T.M.P. Mahadevan 1957 from whose frontispiece Figure 14 has been reconstructed.—‘The Ritual Arena’: looks like a house: Renou 1939.

‘The central position of the Sadas is clear from Figure 16’: the southeastern quarter of the map is adapted from Witzel 1989: 242.

‘They mutter brief formulas referred to as *yajus*’ : Renou 1937, Brereton 2004 and Bhagwat 2004.

‘One of the most highly developed and famous *Śrauta* rituals’ : Staal, CV and Itti Ravi, 1983, I–II.

‘The following are taken from the Taittirıya Saṃhita, based upon Keith’s translation’ : Keith, A. B. 1914. *The Veda of the Black Yajus School entitled Taittiriya Sanhita.* I-II. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press: II, 289–99

‘The Rigveda tells us about Apala, a young woman’ : Hanns-Peter Schmidt. 1987, 1–29.—‘The majority were with women, but he … became the wife of “Bull Horse Man”’: the passage is recited during the Soma rituals and the Agnicayana \(‘Subrahmaṇyā Chant’: Staal, CV and Itti Ravi 1983, I: 369, Plate 61\) and has been discussed by Faddegon, Barend. 1951. *Sudies on the* *Sāmaveda I*. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company: 23–24. After referring to its ‘ritual use and crude popular contents, Faddegon discusses the birth of music, touching on Schopenhauer and Nietzsche.

‘May These Bricks, O Agni, be milch cows for me …’ : Staal, CV and Itti Ravi 1983, I: 508, Plate 80, 511.

‘The *yajus* recitation has a technical name: *puroruc*’ : Gonda, Jan. 1981. *The Praügaśastra*. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company. P. 63. E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma, ‘The Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa on the Atirātra’, in Staal, CV and Itti Ravi 1983, II: 679.


