+++
title = "14 13"

+++

‘All the larger Soma rituals are characterized by sequences of rites which I have called “Soma Sequences”’ : described in Staal, CV and Itti Ravi 1983, I, throughout the later chapters.—‘You are the bed for coupling Rik and Sāman for the sake of procreation:’ *p.* 183 with note.

‘The ritual has been, has been produced/It is born, it has grown’ : Staal, CV and Itti Ravi 1983, I: 625 and Taittirīya Samhitā 3.2.7.2m.

‘Sitting on the ground connects with the earth’ : Gonda, J. 1985. *The Ritual Functions and Significance of Grasses in the Religion of the Veda.* Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company. \#168.—‘The king does more than sleeping with her: he is her husband’: Hara, Minoru. 1973. ‘The King as a Husband of the Earth \(*mahī-pati*\).’ *Asiatische Studien/ Études Asiatiques* 27/2: 97–114.—‘The Buddha sitting makes a vow by touching the earth in a similar spirit’: the gesture \(*mudra*\) is *bhūmisparśamudra*, ‘the gesture of touching \(*sparśa*\) the earth \(*bhūmi*\).’

—‘To the east of the Ancient Hut a new enclosure is constructed … It points to Pirak’: arrow 8 on the Frontispiece.

‘It is connected with Mount Mūjavat in the Pamirs, near the source of the Oxus’ : Frontispiece, north of arrow 5.

‘They mark the progressions of their chant on a piece of cloth with their sticks’ : the *viṣṭuti* markers of *\#*171.

‘The case of the Sāmavedins is special as we have seen’ : Chapter 6. They were discriminated against and still are \(\#142\).


