+++
title = "15"

+++

‘The phrase “narrowing religious outlook” comes from’ : Jawaharlal Nehru. 1946. *The Discovery of India*. New York: The John Day Company, 568 ff.

‘The Powers of Language’ : originally inspired by Renou 1955, ‘Les pouvoirs de la parole dans le Ṛgveda’ which emphasized *vāc manasā*, discussed throughout this book. Related notions include *pratibhā*, ‘intuition’ \(Gonda 1963b and 1963a in general\), *guru,* ‘teacher’ \(Gonda 1965a\), *upaniṣad* \(p. 158\), etc.

‘Where the sages fashioned language with their thought … filtering it like parched grain’ : Rigveda circle 9 deals with filtering the Soma liquid.

‘The Rigveda links language not only to thought but also to vision’ : \#182 ‘interiorization’ and Gonda 1963a.

‘According to Bhartṛhari, a philosopher as well as a linguist, there is no knowledge without language’ : Bhate 1994, Bhate and Bronkhorst 1994, Houben 1995.—‘One is Wilhelm von Humboldt \(1767–1835\), whose numerous works’: Humboldt 1836, 1988.—‘The other is Roman Jakobson \(1896–1982\), who was equally prolific’: \#183, 281.

‘The *viśva* is easy or is it *viśvam*?’ Kunhan Raja, C. 1956. *Asya Vāmasya Hymn \(The Riddle of the Universe\).* *Ṛgveda* 1.164. Madras: Ganesh and Co. follows Sāyaṇa but translates: ‘that does not move.’

‘These are not later than 1.164 which maybe assigned to the tenth century BCE’ : Witzel 1989: 250 and 1997: 264–5.—‘Another term is *anirvacanīya*, ‘which cannot be expressed,’ said of the world’: put in a wider context by Bhattacharya 2001. Verhagen 1997 explains how Tibetan grammarians, having studied Sanskrit grammar for several centuries, speculated on how the ineffable should be pronounced.

‘Some are *upāṃśu*, “articulated \(within the mouth\) but inaudible” ’ : Brereton 1988; Bhagwat 2004.—‘As for rites, some are performed without mantras, that is *t*ūṣṇī*m*’: Renou 1949, Renou and Silburn 1954, Coomaraswamy 1937, 2000.—‘I conclude that our ordinary, natural language is unable to express all that is true’: On Whitehead’s equivocation: \#300.

More on the implications of the use of notations and artificial languages in the next chapter , *p.* 346.

‘The Ultimate Theory, the theory of everything if there will be one’ : Dyson 1985:21, ‘the equations come first.’ Also discussed in Dyson 1992, Chapters 24, 31, and Dyson 2007. Similar in Hawking 1996: 232: ‘Even if there is only one unified theory, it is just a set of rules and equations.’

‘There is hope is we are willing to let languages expand’ : Whitehead, Alfred North: ‘Philosophy is an attempt to express the infinity of the universe in terms of the limitations of language’ in: Schilpp, Paul Arthur. 1941, 1951. New York: Tudor Publishing Company; Library of Living Philosophers. Autobiographical Notes: 14. Whitehead was almost omniscient and, of course, familiar with artificial languages such as the language of algebra but he was neither a linguist, nor a great writer and does not seem to have realized, unlike Pāṇini, Patañjali and Proust, that natural language itself is infinite too. \#273, 298.


