+++
title = "02 History, Geography and an Inkling of Nirvāṇa"

+++

Questions concerning the early relations between Buddhism and the Vedas are highly controversial and can only be answered by taking a closer look at history and geography.

We also have to widen the perspective. Jainism is demonstrably older than Buddhism and did certainly exist at the time of the Upaniṣads. Jainism is generally ascribed to Mahāvīra, an older contemporary of the Buddha, but Jaina sources mention many precursors of which one, Pārśva, is historical, pushing the date back to the ninth century BCE—the time of the Yajurveda. For the Buddha’s death or *nirvāṇa* \(a term that means ‘enlightenment’ or ‘extinction’, literally ‘blowing out’, and does not occur in the early Upaniṣads\), we have two chronologies, the long and the short. The long one assigns it to around 486 BCE. The short one assigns it to around 368 BCE. There is no controversy about his place of birth, which is Kapilāvastu, a place below the lower foothills of the Himalayas, located close to the modern border between India and Nepal. From there the Buddha made his way southwards and reached the kingdom of Magadha with which we have been familiar since the map of Figure 2 where it is indicated by Mg. It is south-east of the Ganges near Pāṭaliputra, modern Patna. The later portions of the Rigvedic Aitareya Brāhmaṇa were familiar with this area and tell us that the Vedic sage Viśvāmitra adopted Magadha tribes that were living there. During this period, major clearance of jungle areas took place, facilitated by the increased use of iron tools. It led to an expanse of rice cultivation with a surplus in production which allowed lavish spending on large rituals such as those performed by King Janaka, a figure known to the composers of the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upaniṣad and in Buddhist sources which does not prove much since both refer to the past often.

It is clear that the middle and later Upaniṣads were familiar with ideas and doctrines that are similar to those of Jainism and Buddhism. At the time of writing \(late 2006\), a controversy was raging on the Indology web-site about the relationships between early Buddhism and the earliest Upaniṣads, the Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka and the Chāndogya, to which I shall refer as BĀU and CU, respectively. It was initiated by Jan Houben of Leiden who asked whether the BĀU was written \(?\) in Buddha’s time. A flood of reactions followed. Those who were primarily familiar with one side argued, predictably, for that side. No one paid attention to geography though all of them knew, presumably, that the Buddha Śākyamuni, ‘Sage of the Śākyas’, was born at Kapilāvastu, near the present border between Nepal and India. I mention two of these reactions by way of illustration.

Matthew Kapstein, a Sanskritist who has done much work on Tibetan Buddhist texts, claimed that the ‘final redaction’ of the CU was composed ‘post-Buddha’. He hardly explained ‘final redaction’, but let us assume that he refers to the composition left behind by the final editors of the CU and BĀU who drew from ‘a common stock of Upaniṣadic lore’, as Olivelle put it. There are, however, other facts that must be taken into account, e.g., that BĀU is the final portion of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa which was composed, in the recension that is relevant in our context, in Kośala, close to the birthplace of the Buddha, and belongs to ca. 800–700 BCE.

Kapstein does not seem to have taken into account that the CU was composed much further west, probably in Pañcāla, and deals very largely with typically Sāmavedic topics such as the syllable OM which refers to the *udgītha*. Nor does he seem to know that Masato Fujii has shown that the Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa, a similar Sāmaveda Upaniṣad, is earlier than the CU.

My second illustration comes from Toshifumi Goto who is familiar with both sides. He has drawn attention to unexpected similarities between Yājñavalkya’s characterization of the *ātman* in the BĀU and four kinds of suffering in Buddhism. The BĀU uses four terms to qualify the self: *ajara* ‘unaging’, *amara* ‘undying’, *am*ṛ*ta* ‘immortal’ and *abhaya* ‘fearless’. They occur together and generally in this order. What happens when we remove the negative prefixes ‘*a*—’, that is, the negations from these terms, and change the order? We begin by replacing *ajara* by *jara* ‘aging’. Goto then replaces *abhaya* by *vyādhi* ‘sickness’ because it is a common and concrete example of something we fear in our daily life. Next comes *amara* which does not occur in Vedic. Goto replaces it by *maraṇam* ‘death.’ Finally, we replace *am*ṛ*ta* by *jāti* ‘birth’, which refers primarily to the second birth, that of initiation. We are left with a description of old age, sickness, death and the enlightened monk and recall the tradition of the young prince Siddhārtha witnessing those four when he had left his home and before he became a Buddha. He then preached the Four Noble Truths which are again reminiscent of the foursome at least in part and which I list here as translated by Lamotte: \(1\) everything is suffering; \(2\) the origin of suffering is desire; \(3\) there exists a Nirvāṇa, an end to suffering; \(4\) a path, defined by the Buddha, leads to Nirvāṇa.

Goto shows that BĀU and early Buddhism are both operating with similar concepts.

Whether the correspondence is perfect or not, it is an ingenious exercise of an excellent philologist which draws attention to deep similarities that had never been brought to the surface. Goto wisely abstained from any conclusion about priorities.

How can we establish priorities when the paths are so slippery? Discussions about the particular use of an isolated term, the rice-and-ghee of the philologist’s menu, are practically useless when we do not even know which language the Buddha spoke. Terms that seem special to us may have come into common usage without us knowing anything about it because the texts are silent. Chronological discussions about priorities cannot be solved by concentrating on these compositions in isolation from wider historical developments and geographical backgrounds. It is important that the BĀU is the final portion of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa and that after the BĀU there must have been enough time for composing other pre-Buddhist Upaniṣads.

That we have to pay attention to a wide perspective is the important conclusion that follows from the work of Michael Witzel. He took account of *all* Vedic compositions and placed them in a sequence that reflects such a perspective. I have followed Witzel often, as mentioned in the Preface. His comments on details are, of course, open to the scrutiny of other specialists, but the extended chronology that he made accessible by placing *all* Vedic compositions in a credible sequence, enabled him to provide us with a perspective that is not only wider but also deeper than the common perspective \(or lack of perspective\). It established, for example, that both the Sāmaveda and the Black Yajurveda originated in Kuru times, that is, ca. 1,000 BCE, and that the Śatapatha belongs to ca. 800–700 BCE, as I mentioned a moment ago. That is well before Buddhism though we cannot say exactly how long.

Apart from chronology, *general* matters of content also play a role. If we compare CU and BĀU we cannot fail to notice that the former is more positive than the latter in the following sense. It is closer to Rig- and Sāmaveda than the BĀU which combines Yajurvedic ritualism with the Upaniṣadic emphasis on renunciation. BĀU characterizes the *ātman* as *neti neti*, ‘neither this nor that’. Buddhism is similarly negative when compared to the earlier Vedas, especially the Rigveda.

The Rigveda consists of poetry and it likes puzzles. That spirit survives in the joy that composers of early Upaniṣads experienced in long sequences of questions and answers and public debates. The Buddha did not approve of such debates and was not interested in the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake. This is epitomized in the story of the man who was struck by a poisonous arrow and asked many questions about who had shot it, what wood the arrow was made of and what its poison contained. The Buddha said: that man would die before he got his answers. In the Upaniṣads, Yājñavalkya presented a variation when he told Gārgī: ‘Don’t ask too many questions\!’, as we have seen in Chapter 10.

We should return to the Four Noble Truths. All such enumerations, famous as they are, do not sound like insights of the Buddha. They are school examples, formulated for mass consumption, possibly by the master himself later in life or by his pupils. Buddha’s insight was Nirvāṇa, the culmination of a path that was subdivided by teachers into steps: morality \(ethics\), meditation or *samādhi* \(variously translated\), and wisdom \(*prajñā*\). Note that *prajñā* contains the same verbal root *jñā*—as does *jñāna* or ‘knowledge’, a synonym of Vedic *veda* and *vidyā.*

The term *prājña* ‘wise’—with different position of the long ā—occurs in the BĀU: ‘Like a man in the embrace of his beloved knows of nothing outside, nothing inside, that person in the embrace of the wise *ātman* \(*prājñena ātmanā*\) knows of nothing outside, nothing inside.’ This speaks for itself and need not refer to anything else, but if we want to, it could be interpretated as a reaction against the tedium of Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas of which it announces the end. It illustrates at the same time an embrace that we do not find in early Buddhist texts,

The Buddhist *prajñā* is not a gnosis of vague and imprecise content. It is a clear vision, as Lamotte emphasizes: ‘embracing the Noble Truths and penetrating in depth the general characteristics of things—impermanence, suffering and the impersonality of phenomena—as well as the peace of Nirvāṇa’.

Clear to Lamotte, no doubt, but Indic philosophies introduced a little more clarity as we have seen at the end of Chapter 10, which referred to the ritual philosophy of the Mīmāṃsā, closely related to the Śrauta Sūtras, and its distinction between activities that have a beginning and an end and those that do not \(p. 183\). It is relevant here.

The Mīmāṃsā philosophy consists of two parts: the first or Pūrva Mīmāṃsā deals with Vedic injunctions which pertain to what is to be accomplished \(*sādhya*\). That applies to ritual and meditation. The Pūrva Mīmāṃsā is also a philosophy of language \(more specifically: of the sentence\) and therefore sensitive to linguistic distinctions. The second Mīmāṃsā is the higher or superior Uttara Mīmāṃsā of the Upaniṣads and the Vedānta which coined the pejorative Pūrva Mīmāṃsā just as did the Mahāyāna with respect to what it called Hīnayāna, the Abandoned Vehicle. The aim of the Vedānta is knowledge which is instantaneous and beyond time. It corresponds to the vision of *prajñā* mentioned by Lamotte. It is ‘accomplished’ \(*siddha*\), not ‘to be accomplished’ \(*sādhya*\) like ritual or meditation. This is an accurate observation with a tinge of ordinary language argumentation supporting it. Knowledge is not a process; *acquiring* knowledge is a process. I do not say: ‘I have the acquisition of knowledge’ but: ‘I have knowledge.’ This holds not only of English. The same applies to the Buddhist concept of wisdom.

Language has serious limitations as we have seen in Chapter 15. No wonder that meditation and wisdom go beyond language. Since there is no special language, apart from mantras, should we be silent in spite of the loquacity of some masters? Recall that the Japanese Zen comes from the Chinese Ch’an which comes from the Sanskrit *dhyāna.* It requires silence and sitting and has a beginning and an end. Zen Masters may render further assistance.

History and geography are concerned with one more topic: the spread of Buddhism over large parts of Asia. Proselytization is absent from the Vedas and Buddhism resembles, in that respect, religions like Christianity and Islam. Even so, the Vedas and Buddhism both moved, albeit in opposite directions. The relevant information was gathered in Part I and is depicted by the Frontispiece at which the reader is invited to take another look. It shows to what extent the movements of Vedic Indo-Aryans and those of Buddhist monks mirror each other. I shall not repeat what I wrote there but we may derive a further conclusion: the tracks numbered 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 depict not only continuous movements and exchanges between people, ideas, rites and goods which show the artificiality of labels such as ‘Vedic’ or ‘Buddhist’, they also explain that, in due course, Buddhism returned to where some features of the Veda came from.


