+++
title = "05 Ahiṃsā and the Public Domain"

+++

In spite of the special cases that have just been described, the Buddhist teaching or Dharma is open to everyone: it is *public*—like the Upaniṣads became eventually. The Aṇguttara Nikāya, an early Buddhist Pali text, declares: ‘Three things are hidden and not public: the wife, the mantras of Brahmans and erroneous views. Three things shine in public and are not hidden: the moon, the sun and the dharma.’ This is a magnificent piece of public relations though it did not prevent the eventual disappearance of Buddhism from India after ca. 1,000 CE.

Performances of large Vedic rituals were generally hidden but they became public in India after the 1975 performance of the Agnicayana that has been described in the Preface. At that time a discussion arose about the sacrifice of goats which belongs in the present chapter. Vedic Indians were not vegetarians. Non-violence or *Ahi*ṃ*sā* was prescribed by Jainas and by Buddhists. It has become widespread among brahmins and in modern India, especially since Gandhi overthrew British colonial rule by strictly non-violent means. Many Nambudiri brahmins opposed the sacrifice of goats accordingly; or were unhappy about it. In 1975, I was visited by a delegation of Jaina monks who described the implications of violence to living beings. All I could do is explain that our personal feelings were irrelevant and that it was our task to record whatever would happen. Earlier, in the area of Udipi, where many Jainas live, Vedic brahmans had used figurines of animals. After much discussion, the Nambudiris decided to replace goats by packages of rice flour, put in banana leaves in the manner this is done for the ancestors at other rites.

In 2003, it was explicitly recognized that Vedic ritual was becoming public when a successful performance of a Soma ritual by Nambudiri brahmans took place in Trichur, Kerala. It was successful also in financial terms, partly because a Dakṣiṇāmūrti shrine, erected at the edge of the ritual arena, attracted donations from large numbers of visitors, increasing rapidly day after day. The event was attended by T.P. Mahadevan and myself and what we witnessed did strike us as a turning point in the tradition. So far, ritual eligibility for the performance of Vedic ritual had not, or not yet changed. I know one Nambudiri girl who recites Rigveda, but the Trichur performance represents a new Śrauta model in the sense that its *patron* changed: it was the public at large.

The first who characterized it as such was the Udgātā priest of the 2003 performance who mentioned it to T.P. Mahadevan in private conversation. He said that it was a *parasya*, that is ‘public’ performance. The ritual may be on its way towards the ‘public domain’, but its roots are firmly planted in Indian history and Sanskrit semantics. The term *para-*, in the sense of ‘public’, has a venerable history in Kerala astronomy and mathematics. The *Parahita* system of astronomical computation was introduced in Kerala in 683 CE. A Malayalam commentary explained its name as ‘being accessible to all people’. But the discussion started with Buddhism and its clear demarcation between what is hidden and what is public. Buddhism wavered about women, but it conquered the world by being accessible to everyone.


