+++
title = "06 Eschatology and Karmic Arithmetic"

+++

We are now ready to return to the thesis of Gananath Obeyesekhere, discussed in Chapter 10: in matters of life and death around the world, rebirth is the default option. I showed in that context that rebirth does occur in the Vedas but did not comment on Gananath’s other thesis: the Buddhist concept of rebirth is ethical unlike the Vedic varieties. I believe that is only partly true. Vedic ideas about rebirth display features that are ethical such as notions of merit and demerit. They refer to ‘ritual’ and ‘good’ acts at the same time because they are not clearly distinguished from each other. The same is true of Buddhism as we shall now see.

Buddhism’s great step was—I quote Lamotte—‘to place action in the mind’. It is explicit in the ‘Four Noble Truths’ which mention desire and clearer in Mahāyāna texts ascribed to the Bodhisattva layman Vimalakīrti: ‘pure mind is the root of good acts; divided mind is the root of bad acts.’ This is close to Yājñavalkya’s statement in the BĀU with mind being added as had *manasā* from the beginning \(Chapter 2\).

Desire is also mentioned in the BĀU and in a different context. Death desires: ‘Would that a second body be born for me’ \(BĀU 1.2.5\). Later in the Upaniṣad, Prajāpati teaches ‘DA’ which means *dāmyata*, ‘self-control’, *datta,* ‘charity’ and *dayadhvam*, ‘compassion’ \(BĀU 5.2.1–3\), all ethical notions.

If the Vedas are familiar with the ethical interpretation of good and bad actions, the question remains why did Yājñavalkya not want to discuss it in public. I believe that there is another explanation besides those given by Śaṇkara and Obeyesekhere for Yājñavalkya’s reticence. That explanation applies to Buddhism as well as Vedic and later Indic religions and I shall characterize it as ‘Karmic Arithmetic’ or ‘tit-for-tat’. It is eminently possible that Yājñavalkya regarded it as simplistic and unethical and thought it was therefore, better not to declare openly that: ‘a man turns into something good by good action \(*pu*ṇ*ya karma*\) and into something bad by bad action \(*pāpa karma*\).’

Figures 25 and 26 show some pictorially striking illustrations of ‘Karmic Arithmetic’ or ‘tit-for-tat’ from later Buddhism. I show them for the same reason as the later Indic representations of spoke-wheeled chariots in Chapter 2: we lack pictures in Vedic studies but we have them in later Indic art.

The illustrations that follow are realistic, of high artistic quality, and come from the greatest monument of Buddhism, if not of classical Indic civilization: the Borobudur of Central Java which was built around 800 CE. They occur on the so-called ‘hidden base’ of the monument, called after the fact that it needs to be covered most of the time by large blocks of stone in order to prevent the entire construction from sliding down the hill. By carefully removing the blocks from each portion whilst keeping all others in place, Dutch, Indonesian and French Sanskritists, Sinologists and archaeologists have been able to show that the hidden reliefs correspond to descriptions preserved in Chinese translations of largely lost versions of a Sanskrit Mahāyāna Buddhist text, the *Karmavibha*ṇ*ga* or ‘The Divisions of Karma’, one of several texts known by that name. This discovery inspired Jan Fontein, art historian, archaeologist and museum director with a good knowledge of Sanskrit and Chinese, to write an illustrated account of the reliefs and the corresponding phrases in Chinese that explain them in precise detail. They show that there is nothing ‘ethical’ about the Buddhist doctrine of karma as it is expressed there because it works in the purely literal and automatic fashion of ‘tit-for-tat’.

One relief \(Figure 25\) shows on the right a wealthy couple seated on the gallery of their house. The husband points his finger at some people that are obviously regarded as ugly. They are ridiculed by two others, standing behind them. The latter are as fashionably dressed as the couple and belong to the same family. On the left, the next relief portrays the same couple as they are reborn themselves equally ugly: the wife has hanging breasts and a child on her back, the husband has fallen on the ground. They are now in turn ridiculed by others who will be ridiculed themselves in their next birth, etc.

Another frieze \(Figure 26\) shows a similarly prosperous couple, smugly seated on their verandah, grinning at low-class street musicians who are begging in their garden. Unfortunately, we have no relief to show what happened to them in the next life but the text is clear and we can easily guess.

Why have I spent time on Tit-for-Tat? Because there is nothing ethical about it: it is entirely mechanistic, like Descartes’s idea of the life of animals. And yet, it seems to be widespread not only in Buddhism but all over the world. Whether the Buddha himself taught any such interpretation of the doctrine may be deemed unlikely. It seems certain that he accepted the idea that desires and intentions determine one’s future destiny in a general manner. I don’t know whether he thought that merit and demerit can be quantified exactly. That idea is not found in the Upaniṣads either. They rather expatiate on the opposite: all desires are extinguished but fulfilled in the absolute which is a true *nirvā*ṇ*a* though the term is not used. The Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad expresses the synthesis or identity that is the end-point of the Vedic perspective as follows: ‘When one’s desires are fulfilled, and one’s self is made perfect, all desires disappear in this very world.’ The theistic Upaniṣads introduce gods. The Śvetāśvatara declares that the Lord is free from desires. I have not treated these later Upaniṣads in Chapter 10 because they go beyond the end or final period of the Vedas.

Buddhist hells are a related matter and are not Vedic. The Vedas refer to Yama, god of the underworld and ruler of the spirits of the dead. The Rigveda does not tell us much about him. He builds a house for the dead and his arrival there is announced by a pigeon. A word for hell, *naraka*, occurs for the first time in the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka but we are spared the gruesome tortures that became a favourite topic in popular Buddhist religion, all over Asia, with Yama reappearing as the infernal judge. In China, he assumes the features of a magistrate with mandarin cap and gown. It is in the description of pain that the similarities between Buddhism and the monotheistic religions in other parts of the world become painfully manifest.


