+++
title = "07 Conceptual Problems"

+++

We may now turn to the more exalted level of philosophy in the Vedas and Buddhism. Both seem to accept an absolute. That applies in the Vedas primarily to the Upaniṣads and in Buddhism especially to some philosophies. The common perception is that the Upaniṣadic *brahman* is positive. It is described as ‘fullness’, *pūr*ṇ*am*, as we have seen. The corresponding Buddhist negative is expressed as ‘emptiness’ \(*śūnyatā*\). It plays an important role in Buddhism unlike the ‘nothing’ of the CU, furthest away from Buddhism in time and space, where no special attention is paid to it. The BĀU accepts an absolute to which it refers as *neti neti* as we have seen. It seems to exhibit the distinction made in some European philosophies between metaphysics or ontology, which deals with what there is \(e.g., an absolute\), and epistemology, the theory of knowledge, which asks how we can know or describe it, e.g., ‘in the negative’, as by *neti neti*. The distinction is obsolete because it cannot be expressed in Chinese and is, therefore, not universal, as A.C. Graham has shown.

There are conceptual or logical problems with absolutes and fullness and emptiness in particular. It is not mere sophistry like the argument that starts from the true premise that a half-empty glass is also half-full; and concludes, after mutiplying by two, that empty is the same as full. The most serious difficulty that affects all absolutes is that they are all alike. An absolute is defined by having no attributes that distinguish it from anything else. It is *anirvacanīya*, nothing can be asserted of it. But if ‘emptiness’ or ‘nothing’ is different from ‘fullness’ or ‘everything’, one of them must be different from the other in at least one respect which provides it with an attribute so that it is not an absolute. I conclude that absolutes are not only all alike, they are all identical. It is similar to an apparent paradox inherent in Spinoza’s belief in ‘God or Nature’. It was accepted by religious people, who were happy that nature was god, and by Marxists, who were happy that god was nature. But it does not support either because Spinoza’s identity is a symmetrical relation: *a* = *b* is the same as *b* = *a*.

Kamaleswar Bhattacharya has looked into similar problems in the context of the allegedly Buddhist statement that the self does not exist. He quotes Buddhist texts that declare unambiguously that it does exist. Bhattacharya admits that in some early Buddhist sources the self was ‘negated’. But these refer to the aggregate of the *skandha*s, ‘aggregates’ or ‘sheaths’, such as feeling or volition, that are *erroneously* identified with the self.

These problems are of interest because they are alluded to in one of the very few passages in the Buddhist canon that are believed to have been uttered by the Buddha himself—not exactly, to be precise, since he spoke in a Middle Indo-Aryan dialect or Prakrit that was subsequently translated into Pali and only then committed to writing in Sri Lanka in the first century BCE. The early Buddhist traditions were orally transmitted, like the Vedas, but without the special Vedic techniques and precautions of the Oral Tradition that belong to Late-Vedic \(see Chapter 4\). Hence the enduring uncertainties about what the Buddha said.

With these provisos, the Buddha is reported to have declared at the second sermon in Benares with reference to each *skandha*: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not myself.’ Even a person without Pali can understand how the words express what they seek to express—when carefully looked at: *n’etam mama* ‘this is not mine’—*n’eso ‘ham asmi* ‘I am not this’—*na m’eso atta* ‘this is not myself.’ It is almost Sanskrit \(note that Pali *atta* corresponds to Sanskrit *ātman*\), later adapted by Buddhist philosophers because it enabled them to discuss with other Indic philosophers. These expressions are as famous as the Upaniṣadic *tattvamasi*. But the Buddha does not say that the self does not exist. It is only the ‘imagined *ātman*’ of the *skandha*s that does not exist. This is one reason that I quoted Yajñāvalkya, at the outset of this book, explaining to his wife that there is no awareness of specifics after death.

Early Buddhist texts mention *brahmans*. This may refer to learned men or to the class or caste. Often, no value judgements are attached. Some of the first converts were themselves brahmans by birth—Mahākaśyapa, as we have seen—and respected for that reason. Other ‘brahmans’ were criticized, especially because of their fondness of rituals—the same commodity that in due course invaded Buddhism itself. Harsher expressions are used in post-canonical Buddhist writings. One text says that brahmans are ‘prattling liars’ \(*asatpralāpa*\). Another, proffering a philosophic variant of Kautsa, that what the Vedas say is constantly changing, which belies any claims about their immutability. In later times, Buddhist philosophers and the philosophers of the Mīmāṃsā refuted each other with avalanches of argument. Śaṇkara, to whom I referred as an Upaniṣadic philosopher, had his go at Buddhism when commenting on the Brahmasūtra’s sūtra: *anusm*ṛ*teś ca*, ‘and on account of memory’. It is a cryptic refutation as a sūtra is expected to be, but the context is clear: the empirical fact that we have memory refutes the Buddhist notion of ‘momentariness’, i.e. the doctrine that nothing is permanent and that reality consists of a series of unconnected moments.

Śaṇkara’s argument is a good example of ‘ordinary language philosophy’, but also a good argument. He starts with two statements that refer to memory. One says: ‘I remember what I saw yesterday’ and the other: ‘I remember what you saw yesterday.’ The first is a statement about memory. The second is not: it is a statement about what you saw. I may know about it, but I cannot remember it. Only I can remember what I saw. Since I remember what I saw, there is continuity of the ‘I’ and no series of unconnected moments.


