+++
title = "09 The First University and Buddhist Logic"

+++

After the Vedas, Sanskrit became the language of learning with Prakrit or Prakrits as close seconds in Buddhist circles. Many traditions remained oral but after Aśoka \(268–231 BCE\), writing began to be used. With the development of cities, some became known for their Sanskrit learning. Most famous were Kāśī, Varāṇasī or Benares in the north and Kānchīpuram in the south. Buddha’s first sermon, the *Dharma-cakra-pravartana* of the previous section, took place at Sarnath, just outside Benares. Kānchī became a centre of Buddhist learning later. During my last visit to its numerous temples, I came upon a large image of the Buddha kept in the garden of the police station.

Sanskrit learning was transmitted by pandits in their own houses and sometimes at the courts of chieftains or kings. The Vedas were transmitted not only within families but through *Vedapā*ṭ*haśāla*s. Medicine prospered in close association with clinics and hospitals which were patronized by emperors like Aśoka. Libraries were attached to many centres of learning and especially to Buddhist monasteries.

The first large universities in the modern sense were organized by Buddhist monks and financed by Buddhist laymen. Buddhist learning was increasingly expressed through Sanskrit, a classical language that possessed greater precision than any modern language. The Theravāda, which was studied in Valabhi in the west, may still have paid attention to Prakrits, but the earliest and most famous university was Nālanda in the east. The medium of instruction was Sanskrit which had been adopted by all Mahāyāna schools and philosophies in order to be able to interact with others. Many courses were taught by Buddhist monks, carefully selected for their learning. The basic curriculum consisted of Sanskrit grammar and logic. Specialists were attracted from elsewhere for mathematics, non-Buddhist philosophies, medicine, astronomy, fine arts, politics and the art of war.

Students came to Nālanda from all over Asia and were free to study what they wanted provided they passed an entrance examination. The working day for teachers and students was eight hours, indicated by a water clock. At the end of the year, academic degrees were granted according to the students’ qualifications. Most students wisely limited their studies to a few disciplines. Some were familiar with more but only the most famous of a series of rectors or chancellors, Śīlabhadra, was claimed to have understood all topics. Philosophy and the logic of perception and inference were especially popular among young scholars.

The University of Nālanda is the first university in the history of mankind. Reportedly founded in 427 CE, at the end of the Gupta period, it was located near Pāṭaliputra or Patna, the same region where Śīkalya and Yājñavalkya had excelled many centuries earlier, a few hundred miles south-east of the birthplace of the Buddha. How are we so well informed about these matters?

Our information is due to Chinese pilgrims who came to India to study not only Buddhist subjects but scientific topics, especially medicine. Chinese as well as Indians, and not only Buddhists, looked upon Buddha as Bhaiṣajya Guru, the Great Healer. Chinese scholars and scientists, soon joined by Koreans, Japanese, Tibetans and others, studied Sanskrit for the same reason Europeans were to study Arabic later: it gave them access to new developments in the sciences.

The most important Chinese visitor was Xuanzang \(Hiuan-tsang: 602–64 CE\) who was in Nālanda between 629 and 646 CE. We know much about him because of his student and biographer Hui Li. Both left detailed information on Sanskrit and Sanskrit grammatical works, not known from any other source. After mastering Sanskrit, Xuanzang spent five years studying the philosophy of the Yoga system under the tutelage of Śīlabhadra. When he had become famous as a scholar himself, Xuanzang started teaching courses and made many friends with whose help he collected manuscripts that were copied for him on the spot. On the way back to China, he lost one horse-load of them when crossing the Indus. He had a list which he sent back to India, requesting replacements.

The next important visitor from China was I-tsing \(634–713\) who spent some fifteen years at Nālanda. His description of the curriculum is very detailed. He mentions the names of the Sanskrit works that were taught, beginning with Pāṇini and Patañjali and adding known and unknown works by Bhartṛhari and others. In the mean time, Nālanda had begun to decline. It came to an end when the buildings were destroyed by Muslim invaders.

The most recent information about Nālanda comes from two sources. The first is Amartya Sen’s book *The Argumentative Indian*. It contains a picture of Xuanzang’s caravan loaded of boxes with books carried on the backs of horses. Xuanzang found India very hot and when, in the end, he wanted to return to China, his Indian friends and colleagues argued that he should stay. Sen quotes in full what they said:
>
> India is the land of Buddha’s birth, and though he has left the world, there are many traces of him …. Why then do you wish to leave having come so far? Moreover, China is a country of barbarians who despise the religions and the doctrine. That is why the Buddha was not born there. The mind of the people is narrow, and their coarseness profound, hence neither saints nor sages go there. The climate is cold and the country rugged—you must think again.

Xuanzang replied with two counter-arguments. Without questioning the first premise, he disputed the inference by invoking Buddhist universalism: ‘It is true that the Buddha established his doctrine here so that it might be diffused to all lands. Who would wish to enjoy it alone, and to forget those who are not yet enlightened?’ He thereupon disputed the second premise because it was not in accordance with the facts:
>
> Besides, in my country the magistrates are clothed with dignity and the laws are everywhere respected. The emperor is virtuous and the subjects are loyal, parents are loving and sons obedient, humanity and justice are highly esteemed and old men and sages are held in honor. How then can you say that Buddha did not go to my country because of its insignificance?

Recently there seem to have been attempts to revive Nālanda. My only information is a letter of December 2006 in the *International Herald Tribune* by Jeffrey Garten, a professor at the Yale School of Management. It refers to a forthcoming meeting in the Philippines, where senior officials from India, Singapore, Japan, etc., are scheduled to discuss what to do with $500 million that still have to be raised \(\!\), to build the university and develop the roads and other infrastructures. Garten is right that ‘a bolder vision is in order.’ His thoughts are about training future leaders and move in the direction of religious dialogue, but he displays his ignorance of Asia’s universities when he writes that they have ‘a long way to go to be in the top tier’, by which he means Harvard, Yale or Columbia. Nor does he seem to be familiar with what has happened in India during several decades and is happening in India, China and the US right now.

In India, the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Mumbai and several national institutes of advanced studies, some of them founded or inspired by Jawaharlal Nehru, have flourished for many decades. I am not referring to the Indian schools that produce 184,000 engineering graduates annually \(as against 71,000 in the US in 2003\). I am writing about small institutions where top scientists do creative work on basic science.

Relevant facts about American universities are that many of the best graduate students in the sciences have been Asians because American students ‘are no longer hungry or ambitious’, as Paul Kennedy put it, adding about the Asians that ‘most of them will be teaching and working in India and China.’ It sheds much light on Nālanda: students kept going there as long as it was the best centre of learning they could find. But there was competition, not only in India. The institution of public examinations in China, Korea and Japan pre-dated Nālanda. It was the foundation for the reforms that Chinese pilgrims made in Chinese Buddhism after their return from India. This led to the formation of translation centres in Central Asia where Sanskrit was translated into Chinese. Central Asia was and remained a meeting point of Indian and Chinese sciences throughout the millennia.

Neither Amartya Sen nor Jeffrey Garten mentions logic which was as basic at Nālanda as the study of Sanskrit. Xuanzang displayed his mastery when discussing the relative merits of India and China. How do we know these facts? It’s the logic, stupid\!

Buddhist scholars made important contributions to Indian logic. Before Patañjali used logical techniques in linguistics, around 150 BCE, Kauṭilya had written a work ‘for the edification of princes’ in which he introduced *ānvīkṣik*ī or ‘investigation’. Centuries later, an author of the *Nyāyasūtra*, now known as ‘the Ancient School of Indian Logic,’ declared that, *nyāya* is the same as *ānvīkṣik*ī.

Buddhist logicians criticized the ancient school and initiated the ‘Medieval School of Indian Logic’ which was in due course replaced by the ‘Modern School of Indian Logic’ or *Navya-Nyāya* which criticized both predecessors. Buddhist Logic does not include the work of the famous Nāgārjuna who tried to demonstrate the absurdity of all intellectual notions and the logical impossibility of all experience like a medieval Derrida. The greatest Buddhist logician was Dignāga who lived around the time of the probable foundation of Nālanda and introduced what we would nowadays call *formal* logic. He constructed the eightfold *Hetucakra* or ‘Wheel of Reasons’. It puts together all possible combinations of reasons and conclusions in a table of eight of which two corresponded to the Old Nyāya. This work is lost in the original Sanskrit but was translated into Chinese and became known as *Hetuvidyā*, the ‘Science of Logic’.

I participated in a conference on *Hetuvidyā* which took place in Hangzhou near Shanghai in 2006. Earlier, I had attended a ‘masterclass’ convened by Sheldon Pollock on ‘Comparative Intellectual Histories in Early Modern Asia’ at the University of Leiden, The Netherlands. The Hangzhou conference and Leiden masterclass throw light on the study of Buddhist logic within the wider perspective of Indology and Buddhology which, because of ever increasing degrees of specialization, have greatly diverged from each other. Leiden and Hangzhou also diverged but they mirrored and complemented each other, like the routes of Vedic and Buddhist on the frontispiece. The Leiden participants who knew Sanskrit did not know that, in between the Old and the New Nyāya, there had been a medieval Nyāya which was Buddhist. Some participants at Hangzhou, who knew Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese, assumed that *Hetuvidyā* was Indian logic and there was no other logic in India.

A third international meeting, after Leiden and Hangzhou, took place in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing and was called *Strings 2006*. I referred to it already \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*\) and need only add, that the statement of the official from Chinese Academy of Sciences predicted the transfer of academic eminence from the US and Europe to India and China, no one knows how soon. The rest of Asia would follow suit once it was discovered that business administration or management are not enough and that there is no technology, economics or a future without basic sciences which include subjects such as physics, logic and Vedic studies.

Nālanda was a great university that was more than a debating club or dialogue between religions. It was based upon the logical study of facts and a further step in the tradition and evolution of the Vedas and Upaniṣads towards universal knowledge. *Viśvatomukham*, ‘looking in all directions’, is the starting point of *viśvavidyālaya*, ‘university’, storehouse of knowledge, *vidyā* or *veda*, hence its inclusion at the end of our discovery of the Vedas.


