+++
title = "10 Final Conclusions"

+++

The Vedas are not all of a piece and it would be unreasonable to expect a single final conclusion about them. What I can do is make a few remarks about Buddhism and the Vedas and try to place them in a wider perspective.

Vedic civilization does not offer us a founder, order or doctrine. Buddhism provides the Buddha and the Sangha, but if we look at its many schools and ramifications, it is clear that it does not offer a single doctrine either. There are many similarities in ideas propounded by the Vedas and doctrines taught by Buddhist schools at different points during their long careers.

The term *nirvā*ṇ*a* does not occur in the early Upaniṣads but is not uncommon in later Sanskrit, as a near synonym of *mok*ṣ*a* in some of its meanings. Lamotte’s formula is clear enough: ‘Nirvāṇa is a clear and precise vision, embracing the Noble Truths and penetrating in depth the general characteristics of things—impermanence, suffering and the impersonality of phenomena—as well as the peace of Nirvāṇa’. Any comprehensive knowledge about the universe including ourselves will have to ‘penetrate in depth the general characteristics of things’ and enlighten us about the human condition.

The University of Kyoto is a great university for many reasons. Not only is it one of the best centres globally for Sanskrit studies, but it has a weekly seminar with a tradition of inviting visiting scholars to give a lecture. The faculty sit around a large table and there are many extra chairs for graduate students. The seminar starts at 2 o’clock and after the talk, which may last for an hour or more, people do not leave but stay on, not to drink tea \(though they do drink tea\) but to ask questions and discuss until the end of the afternoon.

I was fortunate to give such a lecture and the discussion became wide-ranging. A distinguished scholar of Buddhism, himself a Buddhist, raised the question: Would the Buddha have known what a modern physicist knows? A silence fell and people looked at me because I had given the lecture \(which had nothing to do with Buddhism\). But the chair intervened—perhaps it was five o’clock—and said we had had a fine discussion. I do not blame him.

What could I have said? I was ready to say: No, he could not have known. One reason is related to the talk I had just given: the level of mathematical knowledge during Buddha’s time would not enable anyone to formulate what is now known in physics because it can only be done in an artificial language, and the first that might have been suitable, the language of algebra, was not known then and there. Could there have been a clear vision of what holds the universe together and what, if any, might be our place in that world?

Should one delve into the matter, starting with the universe, and check out whether any of the large numbers divined by seers and sages of the Vedas, authors of Jaina and Buddhist works, bards of the Epics and theologians penning Purāṇas, are the ones we seek? Even if they were thinking of cows, there is no need. With so many large numbers to choose from, lots will correspond to those that physics and cosmology need now or later. According to recent estimates, perhaps already outdated, the age of the universe is only 109 or 209 years. The characteristic size of particles is about 10–15 of a meter and the radius of the observable universe about 1027 meters. Even if we add 15 and 27 as an exponent of 10, it is only a fraction of what India has come up with. Contrast the story of creation in the Jewish Ancient Testament, accepted by Christians and repeated in the Qur’ān: it took six days. Heaven was a garden, the Garden of Eden or ‘Adn, believed to be located in Mesopotamia.

In our corner of the universe, we still have not resolved problems of impermanence, suffering, the impersonality of phenomena and least of all peace. As for knowledge, we have little. Physicists tell us that 2 per cent of the universe is now known. About life we know less, and about the development and history of our own species much less. Perhaps we have not been selected for such tasks, our priorities are wrong, or both. But even monotheists have not failed to note—provided they were learned like Pascal—that ‘our intelligence occupies in the order of intelligible things the same rank as our body in the vastness of nature.’