+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
[^p. 374]

## 01
1 [^1]. Now henceforth the domestic sacrifices (will be explained).

[^1]: I, 1, 1 = Gobhila I, 1, I.

## 2 
2 [^2]. During the northern course of the sun, at the time of the increasing moon, on auspicious days, before noon: this is the time at which the constellations are lucky, unless a special statement is given.

[^2]: 2 = I, 1, 3.

## 3 
3 [^3]. At the end (of the ceremonies) he should give to the Brâhmaas to eat according to his ability.

[^3]: 3 = I, 1, 6.

## 4 
4 [^4-6]. The sacrificial cord is made of a string or of Kua grass.

[^4-6]: 4-6 = I, 2, 1 seqq.

## 05
5. If he suspends it round his neck and raises the right arm (so as to wear the cord on his left shoulder), he becomes yaopavîtin.

## 06
6. (If he raises) the left (arm and wears the cord on his right shoulder, he becomes) prâînâvîtin.

## 7 
7 [^7-10]. After having sipped water three times, let him wipe off the water twice.

[^7-10]: 7-10 = 1, 2, 5 seqq.

[^p. 375]

## 08
8. Having besprinkled his feet (with water), let him besprinkle his head.

## 09
9. Let him touch the organs of his senses (i.e. his eyes, his nose, and his ears) with water (i.e. with a wet hand).

## 10
10. When he has finally touched (water) again, he becomes pure.

## 11 
11 [^11-14]. (If) sitting, standing, or lying down (is prescribed), he should understand (that it is to be done) on northward-pointed Darbha grass, with the face turned to the east, to the west of the fire with which the sacrifice is performed.

[^11-14]: 11-14 desunt.

## 12
12. If the word Snâna (or bathing) is used, (this refers to the whole body) with the head.

## 13
13. (The different ceremonies are) performed with the right hand, if no special rule is given.

## 14
14. If it is not clear where a Mantra ends, one should discern it by (adverting to) the beginning of the next Mantra.

## 15 
15 [^15]. The Mantras have the word svâhâ at their end, when offerings are made.

[^15]: 15 = 1, 9, 25.

## 16 
16 [^16]. The term Pâkayaa is used of every sacrifice that is performed with one fire.

[^16]: 16 deest.

## 17 
17 [^17-18]. There the Brahman is (present as) officiating priest, with the exception of the morning and evening oblations.

[^17-18]: 17, 18 = I. 9, 8. 9.

[^p. 376]

## 18
18. The Hot's place is filled by (the sacrificer) himself.

## 19 
19 [^19]. To the south of the fire the Brahman sits facing the north, silently, until the oblation has been performed, on eastward-pointed (Darbha grass).

[^19]: 19 = I, 6, 13 seqq.

## 20 
20 [^20-22]. But if he likes, he may speak of what refers to the sacrifice.

[^20-22]: 20-22 = I, 6, 17 seqq.

## 21
21. Or if he has spoken (words) which are unworthy of the sacrifice, let him murmur the Mahâvyâhtis,

## 22
22. Or (the verse), 'Thus has Vishu' (Sv. I, 222).

## 23 
23 [^23]. If he does himself the work both of the Brahman and of the Hot, let him sit down on the Brahman's seat, and (leave that seat) placing a parasol on it, or an outer garment, or a water-pot, and then let him perform his other duties.

[^23]: 23 = I, 6, 21.

## 24 
24 [^24]. Let him take care not to turn his back to, or become separated (by any person or thing interposed) from what belongs to the sacrifice.

[^24]: 24 deest.

