+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1]. A student after he has studied the Veda and has offered a present to his teacher, should, with permission (of his parents), take a wife.

[^1]: Possibly the Sûtras 12 and 13 should be divided thus: 12. nâgyabhâgau na svishtakrid âgyâhutishv. 13. anâdese sarvatr° &c. Comp. Gobhila I, 9, 26. 27; Sâṅkhâyana I, 12, 13; 9, 10.

[^1]: 3, 1 = Gobhila III, 4, 1.

[^1]: Possibly the Sûtras 12 and 13 should be divided thus: 12. nâgyabhâgau na svishtakrid âgyâhutishv. 13. anâdese sarvatr° &c. Comp. Gobhila I, 9, 26. 27; Sâṅkhâyana I, 12, 13; 9, 10.

## 2 
2 [^2]. And (he should take) the bath (which signifies the end of studentship).

[^2]: 1. 2 = III, 4, 7.

## 3 
3 [^3-4]. Of these two (acts the taking of) the bath comes first.

[^3-4]: 3, 4 desunt.

[^p. 380]

## 04
4. As, however, in the (collection of) Mantras marriage is treated of (first), it is explained (here) before (the bath).

## 5 
5 [^5]. A Brâhmaa with a water-pot, wrapped in his robe, keeping silence, should step in front of the fire and should station himself (to the south of it) with his face to the north.

[^5]: 5 = II, I, 13.

## 6 
6 [^6]. After (the bride) has taken a bath, (the bridegroom) should dress her in a garment that has not yet been washed, with (the verse), 'They who spun' (MB. I, 1, 5). While she is led up (to him), the bridegroom should murmur (the verse), 'Soma gave her' (l.l. 7).

[^6]: 6 = II, 1, 17-19.

## 7 
7 [^7]. To the south of the bridegroom he (who has led her to him) should make her sit down.

[^7]: 7 seqq. = II, I, 23 seqq.; I, 9, 26 seqq.

## 08
8. While she touches him, (the bridegroom) should make oblations of Âya with the Sruva, picking out (portions of it [comp. Pâraskara II, 14, 131), with the Mahâvyâhtis.

## 09
9. A fourth (oblation) with (the three Mahâvyâhtis) together.

## 10
10. The same at the ceremonies of the tonsure (of the child's head), of the initiation (of the Brahmaârin), and of the cutting of the beard.

[^p. 381]

## 11
11. And at the marriage (he makes oblations) with the six verses, 'May Agni go as the first' (MB. I, I, 9 seqq.).

## 12
12. At Âya oblations, unless a special rule is given, the two Âya portions and the Svishakt oblation (are) not (offered).

## 13
13. After (the chief oblations he should) always (make oblations) with the Mahâvyâhtis,

## 14 
14 [^14-15]. And with the (verse) sacred to Praâpati.

[^14-15]: 14, 15 desunt.

## 15
15. He should make an expiatory oblation.

## 16 
16 [^16-31]. After the sacrifice they both arise.

[^16-31]: 16-31 = II, 2, 1 seqq.

## 17
17. (The bridegroom) should pass behind (the bride's) back, station himself to the south, and seize the bride's hand.

## 18
18. Her mother who has, towards the east, put fried grain mixed with amî leaves into a basket,

## 19
19. Should make the bride tread with the tip of her right foot on an upper mill-stone, to the west of the fire, with (the verse which the bridegroom repeats), 'On this stone' (MB. I, 2, 1).

## 20
20. Her brother, filling once his joined hands

 [^1]

[^1]: Possibly the Sûtras 12 and 13 should be divided thus: 12. nâgyabhâgau na svishtakrid âgyâhutishv. 13. anâdese sarvatr° &c. Comp. Gobhila I, 9, 26. 27; Sâṅkhâyana I, 12, 13; 9, 10.

[^1]: 3, 1 = Gobhila III, 4, 1.

[^1]: Possibly the Sûtras 12 and 13 should be divided thus: 12. nâgyabhâgau na svishtakrid âgyâhutishv. 13. anâdese sarvatr° &c. Comp. Gobhila I, 9, 26. 27; Sâṅkhâyana I, 12, 13; 9, 10.

[^p. 382]

with fried grain, should pour it into the bride's joined hands.

## 21 
21 [^21]. Or some friend (instead of the brother).

[^21]: (21 and a part of 27 desunt.)

## 22
22. That she should sacrifice over the fire without opening her joined hands with (the verse which the bridegroom repeats), 'This woman' (MB. I, 2, 2).

## 23
23. (The verses), 'Aryaman' and 'Pûshan' (l.l. 3, 4) (are repeated) at the two following (oblations of fried grain).

## 24
24. After that sacrifice he should go back in the same way (see Sûtra 17), and should lead her round the fire, so that their right sides are turned towards it with (the formula), 'The maid from the fathers' (l.l. 5).

## 25
25. (These rites), beginning from his stationing himself (to the south, Sûtra 17), (are performed) thrice.

## 26
26. After (she) has poured the remnants (of the fried grain) into the fire, he should make her step forward in a north-eastern direction with (the formula), 'For sap with one step' (l.l. 6, 7).

## 27
27. The looking at the lookers-on, the mounting of the chariot, the reciting (of Mantras) at places difficult to pass (on the way of the bridegroom and the bride, is performed) with (verses) suited (to those different occasions).

[^p. 383]

## 28
28. Walking forward behind the fire, the water-carrier (see Sûtra 5) should besprinkle the bridegroom on his forehead.

## 29
29. So also the bride.

## 30
30. When he has thus been besprinkled, (he should repeat the verse), 'May (the Vive devâs) anoint (or, unite)' (MB. I, 2, 9).

## 31
31. He should seize her right hand, together with the thumb, with the six (verses), 'I seize thy hand' (MB. I, 2, 10 seqq.).

