+++
title = "KHANDA 4."

+++
## 01
1 [^1-11]. He should carry her away in a north-eastern direction.

[^1-11]: 4, 1-11 = Gobhila II, 3, 1 seqq.

## 02
2. In a Brâhmaa's house he should establish the (nuptial) fire, should spread out to the west of the fire a red bull's hide with the hair outside and with the neck to the east, and should make her, who has to keep silence, sit down (thereon).

## 03
3. When (somebody) has said that a star has appeared, he should, while she touches him, make oblations (of Âya) with the Sruva, picking out (portions of it), with the six (verses) commencing with (the verse), 'In the lines' (MB. I, 3, 1 seqq.). The remnants he should pour out over the bride's head.

[^p. 384]

## 04
4. Having circumambulated the fire so that their right sides are turned towards it, he shows her the polar star (literally, the firm one), with the verse, 'Firm is the sky' (l.l. 7).

## 05
5. She should break her silence by respectfully calling her Gurus by their Gotra names.

## 06
6. A cow constitutes the sacrificial fee.

## 07
7. Here the Arghya ceremony should be performed.

## 08
8. (Or rather it should be performed) when they have come (to their house), according to some (teachers): [comp. âṅkh. I, 12, 10.]

## 09
9. Through a period of three nights they should avoid eating saline food and drinking milk, and should sleep together without having conjugal intercourse.

## 10
10. Having murmured over food which is fit for sacrifice, the (verses), 'With the tie of food (MB. I, 3, 8-10), he should pronounce the wife's name, N.N.!'

## 11
11. After he has sacrificed (or, eaten?) he should give the rest to the wife.

## 12 
12 [^12-13]. After the lapse of that period of three nights, he should make oblations of Âya with the four

[^12-13]: 12-13 = II, 5, 1 seqq.

[^p. 385]

verses, 'Agni, thou art expiation' (MB. I, 4, I seqq.). A fifth (oblation) combining (the names of the four gods invoked in those verses). The remnants (of Âya) he should pour into a water-pot.

## 13
13. With that (Âya) he should wash her, including her hair and nails.

## 14 
14 [^14]. Thenceforward he should behave as required by circumstances.

[^14]: 14 = II, 4, II.

## 15 
15 [^15-16]. At the time of her courses he should touch with his right hand her secret parts with (the verse), 'May Vishu make thy womb ready' (MB. I, 4, 6).

[^15-16]: 15, 16 = II, 5, 9, 10.

## 16
16. When (that verse) is finished, he should cohabit with her, with (the verse), 'Give conception' (l.l. 7).

