+++
title = "UNKNOWN_TITLE"

+++
## 01
1 [^1-9]. The fire used at his wedding (is kept as) his (sacred) domestic fire.

[^1-9]: 5, 1-9 = Gobhila I, 1, 20-28.

## 02
2. Or that on which he (as a student) puts the last piece of wood.

## 03
3. Or (a fire) kindled by attrition: that is pure, but it does not bring prosperity.

## 04
4. Or he may get it from a frying-pan.

## 05
5. Or from the house of one who offers many sacrifices, with the exception of a ûdra.

[^p. 386]

## 06
6. The service (at that sacred domestic fire) begins with an evening oblation.

## 07
7. After (the fire) has been set in a blaze before sunset or sunrise - 

## 08
8. The sacrifice (is performed) after sunset,

## 09
9. (And) after sunrise or before sunrise.

## 10 
10 [^10-19]. He should with his hand make oblations of food which is fit for sacrifice, having washed it, if it is raw.

[^10-19]: 10-19 = I, 3, 6-18 (16 deest).

## 11
11. If it consists in curds or milk, with a brazen bowl,

## 12
12. Or with the pot in which the oblations of cooked rice are prepared.

## 13
13. (In the evening the first oblation with the formula), 'To Agni Svâhâ!' in the middle (of the sacred fire);

## 14
14. The second (oblation) silently in the northeastern part (of the fire).

## 15
15. In the morning the first (oblation with the formula), 'To Sûrya (Svâhâ)!'

## 16
16. The wiping round the fire and the similar acts, with the exception of the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire), are omitted here.

## 17
17. Some (teachers say) that his wife may offer these oblations, for the wife is (as it were) the house, and that fire is the domestic fire.

[^p. 387]

## 18
18. When (the meal) is ready, in the evening and in the morning, (the wife) should say, 'It is ready! and (the husband) with loud voice, 'Om!'

## 19
19. Then in a low voice: 'May it not fail! Adoration to thee!'

## 20 
20 [^20-37]. Of food which is fit for sacrifice he should make oblations to Praâpati and to (Agni) Svishakt.

[^20-37]: 20-37 = 1, 4, 1 seqq.

## 21
21. Then he should make the Bali offerings.

## 22
22. He should put down (a Bali) at four places, inside or outside (the Agnyagâra);

## 23
23. (Another Bali) near the water-barrel;

## 24
24. (Another) at the middle door;

## 25
25. (Another) in the bed,

## 26
26. Or in the privy;

## 27
27. Another on the heap of sweepings.

## 28
28. He should sprinkle each (Bali with water) before and afterwards.

## 29
29. The remnants he should pour out together with water towards the south.

## 30
30. Of chaff, of water, and of the scum of boiled rice (he should offer a Bali) when a donation has been made.

[^p. 388]

## 31
31. The gods to whom the Bali offerings belong, are, the Earth, Vâyu, Praâpati, the Vive devâs, the Waters, the Herbs and Trees, the Ether, Kama or Manyu, the hosts of Rakshas, the Fathers, Rudra.

## 32
32. He should do so silently.

## 33
33. He should do so (i.e. offer Balis) of all food.

## 34
34. If for one meal the food gets ready at different times, he should do so only once.

## 35
35. If (food is prepared) at different places, (he should take) that which belongs to the householder.

## 36
36. Of all food he should offer (something) in the fire, and give the due portion to a Brâhmaa; he should do so himself.

## 37
37. From the rice(-harvest) till the barley(-harvest), or from the barley(-harvest) till the rice(-harvest) he should offer (the Balis) himself. He should offer (the Balis) himself.

End of the First Paala.

