+++
title = "01 The Concept of Science and its Ancient History"

+++

Science is universal, but the concept of science varies in different cultures. English *science* is different from French *science*, German *Wissenschaft,* Japanese *gaku,* Russian *nauka*, etc. English *science* refers to what it regards as the ‘exact’ sciences, viz., mathematics, physics and other so-called ‘natural sciences’. The French and the other quoted terms include human, life, social and other sciences. They are all exact in that they strive for explicitness and avoid contradictions. The definition I adopt is the widest I could find within these constraints: science is the search for systematic, exact and highly confirmed knowledge of the universe which includes, of course, ourselves. Thus defined, science is similar to *veda*. However, it recognizes more clearly and explicitly the duality of facts and logic.

The history of science is not a random enumeration of sciences that are found throughout history or at different times. Structure and development are inherent in it. Einstein understood more than Newton and Newton more than Aristotle. Medieval Indic mathematicians understood more than their Vedic predecessors and Srinivasa Ramanujan understood more than both. The history of science exhibits not only a gradual widening of knowledge but also a deepening of insight. It is on this history that technology and much else depend. None of this implies that progress is always made. There is no dearth of dead ends; mistaken assumptions have reigned for centuries before they were abandoned and there must be much that is irretrievably lost. We should not therefore regard ancient sciences as more or less clumsy attempts to express modern scientific ideas. But even worse is to think that each science reflects a particular culture. Vedic mathematics is mathematics before it is Vedic. Modern science is not ‘Western’—a term that should be avoided anyway, just as much as ‘Eastern’, ‘Occidental’ or ‘Oriental’. ‘Modern’ science is modern in that it represents the most recent phase, for modern is a relative term; what is modern today may not be modern tomorrow. Science is universal in precisely that sense, and is universal by its very nature.

What does it mean: ‘Science is universal by nature’? Imagine we want to transform a rectangle into a square with the same area. There are many ways to do it, but Greek and Vedic geometers devised the same method in a similar ritual context. It would seem likely that one influenced the other but as it happens, the particular solution they arrived at originated in ancient Mesopotamia. In other cases, solutions may have been arrived at independently. All we know is that there were opportunities for Greek, Vedic and Chinese mathematicians, astrologers or astronomers and other scientists to meet their colleagues in Iran, Alexandria or Central Asia. If they could find a solution to a problem, it did not matter where it came from. It does not even require a common language. And there were no governments or pharmaceutical companies trying to prevent it.

If we study the history of ancient and medieval science, we must reckon with two major insights that have been evolved by historians of science over the last half a century, roughly speaking from Otto Neugebauer and Joseph Needham to David Pingree \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*, *note*\)[^1]. These insights are based upon the textual and historical study of source materials in the classical languages of science that include Arabic, Old-Babylonian, Chinese, Greek, Latin and Sanskrit. The first insight is based upon empirical results, that is, facts; the second upon epistemological analysis, that is, upon a reflection of how we are able to know facts.

[^1]: The only footnote in this book should be dedicated to David Pingree, in recent times the greatest scholar of the ancient sciences of Asia and the Middle East, especially mathematics and astronomy. In roughly forty-three books and 240 articles he used and edited Akkadian, Arabic, Greek, Latin, Persian and Sanskrit sources. His students came from all over the world and many are now teaching these subjects, especially in the USA and Japan. The day before he died, Pingree was informed by the current Provost Robert Zimmer of Brown University in an e-mail that they were contemplating closing down his program that was founded in 1974 by Otto Neugebauer \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*\). If that happens, Brown will be remembered for a wanton act of destruction longer than anything else it may have achieved. In such cases, the President of the University is accountable, just as whoever is the chief of armed forces is accountable for what his army does. As for the history of Indian science, 2005 was a bad year. Professor K.V. Sharma died on 14 January at Chennai. He wrote and edited more than 100 books and 400 articles, a worthy counterpart to Pingree.


The first insight is that ancient and medieval science can only be adequately understood if the Eurasian continent is treated as an undivided unit. It is depicted in Figure 19, which portrays some historical relationships between Eurasian sciences. It shows first of all that Mesopotamian science is earlier than Indian and Chinese. It influenced both in the areas of astronomy and mathematics. Furthermore, it implies that Indic science does not stand alone and cannot be studied by isolating it artificially from the remainder of the Eurasian continent. That is not an obvious fact: it has been established by empirical study. There may be links between that large unit and scientific developments in Africa, but not, for example, with Meso-American cultures which grew in total isolation until the sixteenth century.

The second insight was formulated with special force and clarity by Joseph Needham, whose monumental work is not only about China, but abounds in information on Indic, Near Eastern and European sciences: ‘to write the history of science we have to take modern science as our yardstick—that is the only thing we can do—but modern science will change, and the end is not yet.’


