+++
title = "02 The Traditional List and the Concept of Sūtra"

+++

The Vedic sciences are not objects that moderns are at liberty to make up. Much is known about them and what we know is in accordance with a traditional classification of sciences that belong to the late Vedic period. This was anticipated by a more adventurous or generous list in the early Chāndogya Upaniṣad \(7.1.1–4\). It uses the term *vidyā* which is closely related to *veda*, both meaning ‘knowledge’. The Chāndogya passage starts with sage Nārada asking Sanatkumāra, ‘Eternal Youth,’ to teach him what he knows. Sanatkumāra returns the question: ‘Tell me first what you know. Then I’ll tell you what more there is to know.’ Nārada gives a long reply in which he refers to the four Vedas, the corpus of histories and ancient tales, ancestral rites, mathematics, soothsaying, the art of locating treasures, and the sciences of ritual, spirits, government, heavenly bodies and serpent beings. ‘All that, sir, I have studied.’ Eternal Youth responds wisely: ‘All that is nothing but names.’

A later and more realistic Vedic classification refers to seven sciences as *vedā*ṇ*ga,* ‘limbs of the Veda’. The word ‘science’ is an apt interpretation of *a*ṇ*ga*, ‘limb’, provided we interpret ‘science’ not in the idiosyncratic English manner.

I have counted the Vedic sciences as seven though the first two are combined. Their names with rough translations into English are: ritual \(*kalpa*\) to which geometry \(*śulba\)* is attached; phonology/phonetics \(*śik*ṣ*ā*\); etymology \(*nirukta*\); grammar \(*vyākara*ṇ*a*\); prosody \(*chanda*s\) and astronomy/astrology \(*jyoti*ṣ*ā*\). All were orally conceived and transmitted.

Two features of this list deserve notice. The first is that the science of ritual stands in front which is in accordance with the findings of our Chapters 7, 9 and 12. It is also consistent with our chronology because *kalpa* is the subject of the Śrauta Sūtras, which overlap in time with late Brāhmaṇas and early Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads, all earlier than the traditional Vedic limbs. We have seen that the Śrauta Sūtras consist of detailed descriptions and provide a theoretical and analytical account which justifies their inclusion among the ‘limbs of the Veda’ and in this chapter. The second special feature of the list is that four of the sciences deal with language. That is strikingly different from the entire Euro-American development in which these sciences, despite the fact that language is the chief characteristic of our species, have always played a relatively minor role. As for philology, an ancient and venerable discipline, it is not a science of language but is concerned with texts.

The science of ritual is the first in which the notion of *sūtra* or ‘rule’ comes to the fore. I have used that term often but not explained it so far. Literally, it means ‘thread’ and belongs to a family of related terms and concepts that originated in the domain of textile manufacture. Many of these terms are applied to scientific works: *grantha*, ‘knot’, *tantra*, ‘loom’ or ‘warp’, *nibandha,* ‘tying’, *prabandha*, ‘band’ or ‘tie’, etc. *Sūtra* or ‘rule’ suggests a scientific work in which objects are woven together in the manner in which strands are sewn/woven/turned together into a thread. Rules contrast with ‘enumeration’ \(*saṃkhyā*\) because they are analytic and tend towards generalization and universalization. In the introduction to his Great Commentary *\(Mahābhā*ṣ*ya*\) on Pāṇini’s grammar, the grammarian Patañjali explained that the expressions of language cannot be enumerated because they are infinite in number. Unlike an analytical science that makes use of rules, an enumeration would never reach the end. Patañjali concluded that a treatise of rules and exceptions must be composed instead. Pāṇini’s grammar is that treatise. It is Vedic in spirit because *brahman* and *vāc* were both regarded as infinite. But it is not Vedic in extent because it described and analysed the spoken language of Pāṇini’s time.

A common definition of *sūtra* of later date is that it ‘consists of a few syllables, not leading to doubt, containing the essence of a topic, fully explicit, without embellishment and faultless.’ The term I have translated as ‘embellishment’ is none other than the Sāmavedic stobha. The concept of sūtra was soon deepened and widened. Deeper insights into language led to the concepts of meta-language and of *paribhā*ṣ*ā* or ‘metarule’. Metarules are rules about rules \(*Thirteen: Secrets of the Sadas*\). Like other technical concepts of the science of language, their roots lie in the science of ritual. An example is ‘The rule “he deposits Brick A” comes before “he recites mantra B for brick A”.’


