+++
title = "03 The Science of Ritual"

+++

Following the order of the ‘limbs of the Veda,’ we begin with the science of ritual. It deals with many more scientific concepts than the notion of ritual evokes in a modern mind. There is nothing in modern science that corresponds to such a discipline unless it is directly inspired by it, like Hubert and Mauss. It is a science because it provides systematic and highly confirmed knowledge of ritual structures such as self-embedding and other forms of recursiveness mentioned or alluded to in Chapters 11 and 12. Other civilizations have been interested in the study of ritual—the Confucian and Taoist in China and the Orthodox and Catholic during the European middle ages—but it is unlikely that they attained the high level of technical and theoretical sophistication that we find in the Śrauta Sūtras because they lacked the close interaction between ritual and grammar that characterizes Vedic science. Some technical concepts of the Vedic science of ritual anticipate linguistics, modern logic and computer science.

Since we have come across illustrations from the Vedic science of ritual in earlier chapters, I shall illustrate it in the present section with another notion which exemplifies at the same time the concept of metarule: the notion of *default*. Its practice is clear: what I type on my keyboard appears in *roman* on my screen because that is the default option; it appears in *italics* when I push additional keys or move the mouse accordingly. Its theoretical status is clear: it is a meta-concept.

In the domain of *śrauta*, the road that led to these discoveries was paved by practical abbreviations in the formulation of rules. They have to be studied with the same care as formulas in a textbook of mathematics. For example: ‘whichever among the divinities have secondary names, for them \(mantras are recited\) in low voice or softly; as for the others, loudly, provided there is an explicit statement.’ Similarly: ‘when there is no special statement, the usual one about the sacrificial fees prevails.’ In this last statement, ‘the usual one’ refers to the default option.

Metarules for default are illustrated by all the Śrauta Sūtras and are explained in simple terms by Āpastamba. It singles out default options for oblations, priests and implements such as ladles. It begins with specifying the default oblation as clarified butter. It means that the oblation is clarified butter if nothing else is stated. The default priest is the Adhvaryu. It means that he has to perform the job at hand if no one else is specified. The default implement is the *juh*ū ladle. There are degrees of default: when the *juh*ū is already used, and no other implement is specified, the oblation has to be made with the help of the *śruva.* The notion of default is common among the grammarians and the notion of multiple default occurs in Pāṇini’s theory of syntactic relations or *kāraka* which is preceded by the metarule: ‘\(the following rules apply\) when it \[i.e., the *kāraka*\] is not \(already\) expressed.’

Metarules about default are formulated in the sūtra style which is terse and brief, as laid down in the definition. The rules of Āpastamba are exemplary and I shall list them as they appear in Sanskrit to illustrate that brevity. The first rule is long, but part of it is implicit in the next three: *juhotīti codyamāne sarpirājyam pratīyāt*, ‘if offering is stated, clarified butter is implied’; *adhvaryu*ṃ *kartāram* ‘Adhvaryu \(is\) the agent’; *juh*ūṃ *pātram ‘juh*ū the ladle’; *vyāp*ṛ*tāyā*ṃ ś*ruveṇa*, ‘if already employed, the *śruva*’.

The science of ritual was the first to display the kind of brevity of expression about which a later grammarian wrote: ‘grammarians rejoice over the saving of half a syllable as over the birth of a son.’ But brevity is not sought for its own sake. It expresses the most general solution to a particular problem as Paul Kiparsky has explained.


