+++
title = "04 Geometry"

+++

Vedic geometry is attached to ritual because it is concerned with the measurement and construction of ritual enclosures \(such as the ritual arena of Figure 15\) and of altars \(Figures 21–22\). Our knowledge is based to a small extent upon the living tradition, but more complete information survives in the Śulba Sūtras. The most important are Baudhāyana, Āpastamba and Mānava, which are attached to Śrauta Sūtras of the Black Yajurveda, and Kātyāyana which is attached to the White. The term *śulba* means rope. Ropes and pegs are used for measurements, to mark a straight line or circle and construct a square, rectangle, trapezium or straight line parallel or orthogonal to another.

A common problem in Vedic and Greek geometry was the construction of a square equal in area to a given rectangle. It was applied to the construction of altars. The Vedic geometric tradition seems to preserve earlier forms. Eight of them are squares which consist of sun-fired bricks that are themselves squares and rectangles or oblongs. Six are assigned to priests and situated in or near the Sadas. They include the altars of the Rigvedins in Figure 20. All are identified with the ritual patron: they are *his* altars. That means: they are functions of or relative to his size. The patron’s size is measured from the tips of his fingers, raised above his head, to the ground.

The uncommon patterns that these altars display are not only described in the Śulba Sūtras, but supported by archaeology, for similar patterns of slightly larger square altars have been excavated by Jarrige and other French archaeologists at Pirak at the foot of the Bolan Pass \(Frontispiece, 8\). The dates lie roughly between 1500 and 1200 BCE when Vedic Indians had already settled there. Eight of these altars are depicted in Figure 20.

They are arranged in increasing complexity in order to present a reconstruction of Proto-Geometric evolution. The similarity between altars from the Sadas and the excavated variety is striking. The reader is invited to identify which is which as a kind of exercise. \(The answer is given at the end of the Geometry section on *Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*.\)

The development illustrates how altars known from the later Vedas are situated within the period of those that were excavated at Pirak—a result that is in accordance with our present understanding of the sequence of development and the absolute chronology. There is one exception: Number 8. It fits nicely in the sequence but comes from Greece where I found it near the famous temple of Poseidon in Delphi. I inserted it for good measure, but the two experts on Greek architecture I consulted, say that the altar is a late construction and has nothing to do with my Vedic altars. I don’t dare to doubt them.

Next in complexity is the domestic fire altar of the Soma ritual, a square consisting of five layers of bricks that are fired in a kiln. It replaces the small square at the eastern end of the Ancient Hut in Figure 16 \(referred to on Seven: Yajurveda\). The origin of the Vedic word for brick, *i*ṣṭ*akā*, is non-Indo-European though it is Sanskritized in appearance: it comes from the lost language of the BMAC \(‘Bactrian-Margiana Archaeological Complex’\) of Central Asia \(6, on the Map\). Each of the five layers consists of 21 = 3 x 7 such bricks. Each brick is rectangular and the lengths of its sides stand in the proportion of 7 to 3 so that each layer is square. The total number of bricks is 5 x 3 x 7 = 105. The configuration of bricks in the first, third and fifth layer faces one direction, that of the second and fourth the other direction that is perpendicular to it. See Figure 21.

The configuration of the thousand bricks in the offering altar of the Agnicayana ritual is much more complex. There are five layers of 200 bricks each, and the altar has the shape of a bird. The bricks are not only square or rectangular. Some are triangles of various sizes and shapes. Numerous rules have to be followed when the bricks are ‘piled’, for everything must fit. It signals the beginning of geometry proper and can be dated with some measure of probability because some of the mantras, with which the bricks are consecrated, occur in the earliest Yajurveda Saṃhita, the *Maitrāya*ṇī, about 1,000 BCE. Figure 22 depicts the configuration of bricks in the first layer.

The bricks may be deposited in any order, but the numbers in the Figure indicate the order in which they are consecrated with mantras.

Vedic geometry developed from the construction of these and other complex altar shapes. All are given numerous interpretations in the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas, enumerated in lists and competing with other lists that show, by their mutual inconsistencies, that they are purely arbitrary—food for mythologists or psychologists of the Jungian variety, perhaps. But most of these shapes are also found in ancient Greek geometry which adds three-dimensional varieties such as the cube. India and Greece seem to be related, the Indic being the earlier because it was less developed. But the relationships may be more complex since Greece and India both derived mathematical knowledge from the Old-Babylonians who had developed it a millennium or more before.

The Old-Babylonians were also conversant with the so-called Pythagorean triples, e.g., 5, 12 and 13 with the property that 52 \+122 = 132 \(in our modern notation\). The Śulba Sūtras contain the earliest extant verbal expression of the closely related theorem that is still often referred to as the Theorem of Pythagoras but that was independently discovered by Vedic Indians, Greeks and Chinese. The theorem is expressed in identical terms by Baudhāyana and Āpastamba: ‘the diagonal rope of an oblong produces both what the flank and the horizontal ropes produce separately.’ Put differently, the sum of the areas of the two squares constructed on the flank and the horizontal equals the area of the square constructed on the diagonal.

The figure that was in the minds of Baudhāyana and Āpastamba and that they must have pegged with ropes in sand or on the ground, is illustrated in Figure 23. It has been preserved in manuscripts of later date. The numbers that have been added reflect the ‘Pythagorean’ triangles I mentioned just now. These and other such triplets were undoubtedly known to Baudhāyana and Āpastamba but they did not write them down. The words that I have added could not have been written by them either since they were not familiar with the art of writing.

The Theorem of Baudhāyana \(as it is now often called in India\) was not proven in the Śulba Sūtras as they have come down to us. Perhaps a proof was added by the teacher and remained part of an oral tradition. A diagram of later date suggests that a proof was known to Bhāskara I in the first half of the seventh century CE.

Chinese mathematicians discovered that theorem during the Han Period \(202 BCE–220 CE\). A proof was given in algorithmic form by Liu Hui in 263 CE. It corresponds to the sketch in \(Appendix I\) where it is explained.

Pythagoras, who was born about 570 BCE on the island of Samos, may or may not have discovered the theorem named after him. It was probably a discovery of the Pythagoraean school which was active in the sixth and fifth centuries BCE in ancient Greece and Italy. It became a theorem between then and around 300 BCE when Euclid included it in his *Elements* together with a proof. This could be around the same time as Āpastamba or a little later and certainly later than Baudhāyana. Before we discuss the implications of this, the reader may like to take a look at the proof that Euclid gave in his *Elements* and that is not algorithmic or algebraic but purely geometrical. It is given, in Heath’s translation, in Appendix II. It is quite complicated, for two reasons. First, Euclid treats the general case, where the sides of the rectangle may have any length. That is unlike the Chinese case where the only rectangles that are considered have sides where the ‘horizontal rope’ and the ‘flank’ consists of units with lengths of 3 and 4, respectively. The other reason for complexity is that Greek and Vedic used geometry but not algebra. Algebra is much easier than geometry—for us. Newton and Descartes still regarded algebra as a barbaric art but they were getting out of date. Leibniz had already seen that algebraic notations were the way of the future.

The similarities between Greek and Vedic geometry go far beyond the identity of the two theorems we have discussed. Greek and Indic geometries are historically related but how can their relationship be explained? Certainly not by the fact that Greek and Vedic are Indo-European languages, for why did all those other IE speakers or their ancestors—Iranians, Tocharians, Slavs, Celts or Germans—not produce geometry? Another possibility is the Babylonians whose importance for the early history of Asian science I have mentioned several times. They developed mathematics and astronomy/astrology long before Greeks and Indians and influenced them both. At first, I speculated that Babylonian influence on Vedic geometry was unlikely because the Vedic/Greek variety was connected with altars and the Babylonian seemed to be inspired by celestial bodies. I concluded that both Greeks and Indians must have picked up the elements of geometry from the inhabitants of the BMAC who constructed large fortresses from square and rectangular bricks; and whose word for brick was adopted by the Indians. The idea is supported by the geography depicted on the Map: the speakers of Hittite and Mitanni, to whom arrow 9 points, lived in, or close to, what is now called Turkey or Asia Minor, a large chunk of land where Greek was spoken on the coastal regions and many Greek mathematicians originated. If speakers of Indo-Aryan passed through BMAC territory and picked up geometry it would have linguistic implications. The BMAC word for kiln-fired brick, *i*ṣṭ*akā*, would have been taken to India by Indo-Aryan speakers instead of being brought there by BMAC visitors or immigrants. The word occurs in the Yajurveda. It points to the Kuru period and region, an area where various cultures met.

I then met Jens Høyrup who knows mathematics and its history, Old-Babylonian and a great deal more. He explained that sections of Euclid’s *Elements* consist of ‘cut-and-paste’ results, long known from Babylonian sources. It seems likely, that Ś*ulba* geometry was in several respects influenced by the Babylonians. That Babylonian influence reached the Yajurveda is clear from the ‘mysterious sixty’ in the second recitation of the patron or Yajamāna: ‘May these bricks, o Agni, be milch cows for me’ \(Chapter 7, *Seven: Yajurveda*\). The number ‘sixty’ is prominent in the Rigveda itself.

\[Answers to Which Is Which \(Figure 20\): \#1 comes from Pirak; \#2–\#5 are Sadas altars; \#6, \#7 and \#9 come again from Pirak.\]


