+++
title = "07 The Prātiśākhyas and the Padapāṭha"

+++

The classification of sciences as ‘limbs of the Veda’ with which we began includes four sciences of language. I shall try to simplify, reconstruct their salient features differently and treat them in three sections. The first examines the Prātiśākhyas and the Padapāṭha with which we are already familiar from Chapter 4.

The Prātiśākhyas are attached to each of the Vedic schools \(*śākhā*\) as their name indicates. It will be helpful, therefore, to caste another glance at Table 1 on *Four: The Four Vedas*. The most important is the Rik-Prātiśākhya. The Yajurveda, has one for the Taittirīya and another for the White Yajurveda. The Atharvaveda has two and the Sāmaveda possesses a number of compositions that deal with the many features of its ritual chants. Scholars have long discussed whether the early Prātiśākhyas pre-date the famous grammarian Pāṇini and if so, which of them. The fact is that their linguistic content is basically pre-Pāṇinian though the present form in which we know them has been influenced by Pāṇini’s grammar which in due course eclipsed them all because it went beyond the śākhās and described the spoken language of his time and place. This remark is relevant to the development of linguistic systems and to the chronological sequence of scientists and their works. There were Bloomfieldians left, chronologically speaking, after Chomsky’s first revolution, which does not contradict the fact that Chomskian linguistics was, among other things, a reaction against Bloomfield and, therefore, best understood and described as a new chapter in the history of linguistics.

The Prātiśākhyas deal mostly with what are nowadays called phonetics and phonology but their focus is on empirical completeness, not theoretical development. That explains their being formulated for each of the four Vedas separately, and being complete for each of those compositions. They often deal with *sandhi* or ‘euphonic combination’, the distinctive feature of the continuous speech of the *saṃhitā* which contrasts with the word-for-word analysis of the Padapāṭha as illustrated for the Rigveda in Chapter 4, which also gives an idea of some of its complexities. For *sandhi* is not a simple matter in Sanskrit. It occurs in other languages, but often on a smaller scale. It applies to the distinction in English between two forms of the indefinite article: ‘*an apple*’ before a vowel, but ‘*a banana*’ before a consonant. Important in our context has been the word *upa-ni-ṣad* where the dental *s* of *sad* ‘to sit’ turned into the retroflex ṣ of ṣ*ad* because of the preceding *i* so that *upa-ni-sad* became *upa-ni-ṣad*.

The Padapāṭha follows the sequence of verse and hymns in the Vedic corpus, that is, it marks the boundaries of words, stems, prefixes, suffixes, roots, etc., each time they occur. It does not make generalizations and the same holds for the Prātiśākhyas. They contain, therefore, much repetition but, at the same time, the result is an extremely extensive inventory and compilation of linguistic facts. These cannot be called ‘grammar’ or ‘linguistics’ because they do not deal with the infinity of a living language. On the contrary, they are concerned for each of the Vedas with a finite corpus of a large size. Within that corpus they sought and achieved completeness of description. Surya Kanta called the Rik-Prātiśākhyas ‘*entirely* free from all oversights’. W.D. Whitney noted on a section of the Taittirīya Prātiśākhyas, that he could not discover any case of a retroflex nasal in the Taittirīya Saṃhitā from a dental nasal in the Taittirīya Padapāṭha ‘that was not duly provided for’. This completeness provides a magnificent demonstration of Patañjali’s remark that enumerations, which may be complete for a finite corpus, cannot be used to characterize the expressions of a living language because they are infinite in number and therefore require a grammar that consists of rules.

The rules of the Prātiśākhyas are often concise. The rule that *t* becomes *l* when *l* follows is expressed as: *takāro le lam*. This metarule states: ‘a change \(in the *object*-language: i.e., of *t*\) is expressed as an Accusative \(*dvitīya* in the Sanskrit metalanguage: i.e., *lam*\) when *l* follows which is a Locative \(*saptam*ī\), i.e., *le*\)’. Other rules are longer because they apply to a number of cases, e.g., the definition of *savarṇa* or ‘homorganic’ as ‘having the same place, producing organ and effort of articulation in the mouth.’ Here, ‘place’ refers to throat, palate, teeth, etc. ‘Producing organ’ means tip of the tongue, rolling back the tip of the tongue, tip of the teeth, middle of the jaw, etc. ‘Effort of articulation’ refers to closed, semi-closed, open, etc. The close attention that is paid here to movements and processes within the mouth is in tune with the close attention paid to breath \(*prāṇa*\) throughout the Vedas.

All these discoveries are closely related to the oral tradition. They originated not *in spite of* the absence of writing but *because* of it.


