+++
title = "08 The Sound Pattern of Language"

+++

The second Vedic science of language as I have reconstructed it led to a major empirical discovery with profound implications for the methodology of linguistics. It was made by Vedic reciters who were engaged in composing Prātiśākhyas and constructing Padapāṭhas or were already familiar with them; and arrived at in stages during roughly the same period. Because the reciters did not think of changes in the Vedic language—what we interpret as such, for example, in the distinction between early, middle and late Vedic \(Chapter 4\)—they would interpret them as characteristics of different regions \(which was often the case\). They emphasized, therefore, what we would call synchronic linguistics, not diachronic philology. All the time they used purely empirical methods: they did not prescribe but describe. They went further than most modern linguists. They did not imagine that language starts from the larynx. They knew that its deeper source lies in the intention, that is, the mind or heart of the speaker. In so doing, they anticipated by more than two millennia the spirit of synchronic linguistics, initiated in Europe by de Saussure; and of psycholinguistics which began to develop in the twentieth century.

After reaching a sufficiently high level of sophistication, the reciters made the major discovery of which the likely beginnings are depicted in Figure 24. It illustrates how the sounds of a language are produced by constricting the vocal tract at a particular point along its stationary portion. If we move from the larynx or throat to the lips, we pronounce *ka, ca,* ṭ*a, ta, pa* \(the short *a*’s are added for the sake of pronunciation\). Each syllable exists unvoiced or voiced, provided with more or less breath, which may be made to pass through the nasal cavity. Thus we produce, in the case of *ka*, the sequence *ka*, *kha*, *ga, gha,* ṇ*a*; and similarly for the other four consonantal syllables. The two directions are combined in the two-dimensional square or *varga* that is depicted here. In order to complete the picture, a few more consonantal syllables have to be added along with semi-vowels and vowels.

The Vedic system of the sounds of language exhibits and embodies what is nowadays called phonetics, but is close to phonology, which studies features of those same sounds as parts of a system. The system exhibits universal properties of language. I do not imply that it is the same for all languages. Retroflexes \(*mūrdhanya*\), which have been put in a box, are common in Indic languages but do not occur in all languages. Whatever they are, the sounds of human speech may be accommodated in some such scheme.

As far as I know, the Vedic discovery of the sound pattern of language was made only once in human history. Modern linguistics uses distinctive features, but they would not exist if the sound pattern of language had not been discovered two-and-a-half millennia earlier.

The sound pattern of language was of great historical importance because it underlies many of the scripts of South, South-east and East Asia including Balinese, Bengali, Burmese, Devanagari, Grantha, Gujarati, Gupta, Gurmukhi, Japanese, Kannada, Khmer, Khotanese, Korean, Lao, Malayalam, Nepali, Oriya, Pallava, Sinhala, Tamil, Telugu, Thai and Tibetan. None of these were alphabets; all were syllabaries. This presents us with a paradox, because a strictly oral tradition influenced countless writing systems.

The discovery of the sound pattern of language was oral in two senses: it was concerned with the mouth as the place where language becomes audible and took place in an oral culture before the invention or introduction of writing. Neither was understood in western Asia or Europe and both are still beyond the grasp of most moderns who are not Indians. The most recent work on *The World’s Writing Systems*, a tome of almost a thousand pages, regards the Vedic syllabary as a kind of alphabet. The *Oxford English Dictionary* writes that a syllabary ‘serves the purpose of an alphabet.’ This is not so, and these verdicts are simply cultural constructs, based upon alphabets that arose in western Asia. These alphabets continue to cause problems of spelling and pronunciation in languages such as English, whether it is someone’s first or *n*-th language. Unlike ABC’s, to which there is no rhyme or reason, the Vedic syllabary is rational and practical like Indian numerals. Other Asians adopted and adapted it for those reasons.


