+++
title = "01 The Role of the Yajurveda"

+++

The Yajurveda is not simply the next Veda. Sāyaṇa, a scholar with a deep and wide-ranging knowledge of the Vedas, described the Rig- and Sāmavedas as the pictures \(*citra*\) and the Yajurveda as the wall \(*bhitti*\). If he is right, the reader has been reading about beautiful things—Rigveda poetry and Sāmaveda chants—and should now get ready for the study of what supports and holds them together. These supporting structures must refer to ritual, the domain of the Yajurveda, which is concerned with complex activities. How to understand these structures? Must we wade through masses of ritual descriptions?

Stephen Lindquist is right that we should sometimes pay attention to traditional interpreters who may preserve something a modern scholar cannot know. Sir Harold Bailey did not agree with it, as we shall see in a moment, but it certainly applies to Sāyaṇa, who was chief minister of Harihara II, one of the rulers of the Vijayanagar empire which controlled a large part of South India in the fourteenth century CE. Together with his equally gifted brother Mādhava, who wrote on philosophy and also served Harihara II, Sāyaṇa contributed to the fame of the empire in the areas of arts and letters by writing extensive commentaries on the Vedas. Sāyaṇa knew Vedic ritual well because the Vijayanagar period was a period of Vedic revival as had been the Chola period earlier and the Gupta period earlier still.

I played records of Veda recitation in the rooms of Sir Harold Bailey at Cambridge which were also his library. The reader will remember him as one of the reviewers of Wasson’s book on Soma \(*Five: Rigveda*\). Bailey had the habit of putting pamphlets, offprints, booklets and books into other books rather than next to each other. With few students in attendance, he used a carton board to which he attached large sheets of paper. Each time I had filled a sheet with the help of a crayon, he tore it off carefully. We discussed the meaning and etymology of words and I asked Bailey whether he took Sāyaṇa’s interpretations into account. He raised his bushy eyebrows whimsically and said that Sāyaṇa, when he does not know the meaning of a word, says that it means water. Bailey, who was familiar with all the early languages of the Indo-European family and many others, was an etymologist at heart. He once made a passing suggestion, perhaps because of his liking for Wasson \(*Five: Rigveda*\), that *soma* should not be derived from the root *su-* and the suffix *ma-*, but analysed as *som-a* in which the first element corresponds to German *Schwamm*, Latin *fungus,* Greek *spongia* = English *sponge* and other Indo-European terms for mushroom. No one took it seriously. Having come this far we should recall what Voltaire said about etymology: it is a science where vowels count for nothing and consonants for little. Yes, etymology is more speculative than old-fashioned philology but not as speculative as string theory in modern physics.

Geldner in his Rigveda translation mentions Sāyaṇa often. According to Renou, we should look at what he says but not forget that there is a gap of thirty centuries between him and the Rigveda and the tradition that connects them has been interrupted often. Each gap lasted many centuries. One between the Vedic period and the Gupta \(more than a millennium\), a second between Gupta and Chola, a third between Chola and Vijayanagar, a fourth between Vijayanagar and the present. Plenty of time to forget again and again. But there is strength in the Oral Tradition and assiduous training in schools and on the ritual grounds. The Upaniṣads know what preserves it and remind us: Revere Memory\!

We may get an idea of what Sāyaṇa imagined when he declared that the Yajurveda constructed a suitable space for Rig- and Sāmaveda to display their beauty. He was thinking of murals that were fashionable during the Vijayanagar period. I have seen one that relates to our story. Like Sāyaṇa and Mādhava who were in the service of Harihara II, the latter’s predecessors, Harihara I and Bukka, were also brothers. During a war with the Sultanate in Delhi, they were captured and taken not to an undisclosed place, but to Delhi where they embraced Islam which stood them well with the Sultan. In due course they were freed and dispatched back, this time to quench a revolt. It was not a wise decision on the part of the Sultan, though there are different versions of what happened. According to one, the two brothers fell under the spell of Vidyāraṇya, not only a scholar who wrote on philosophy but a great sage. Fired by his teaching, they returned to the Hindu fold and continued to pursue schemes of conquest and consolidation. According to another version, Vidyāraṇya was an insignificant ascetic who was Jagadguru or Śaṇkarācārya of the Śṛṇgeri Maṭha, stronghold of the Advaita Vedānta.

The large and beautiful painting that I saw comes from the ruins of Hampi and depicts Vidyāraṇya being carried in procession on a palanquin \(see Figure 14\). He looks like a great sage rather than an insignificant ascetic. I prefer that version of the story, but the significant point in our context is that it is a ceiling panel painted behind walls. Sāyaṇa was, of course, familiar with this painting. His simile seems to refer to the walls of the Sadas in which Sāmavedins sing their *stuti*, Rigvedins recite their *śastra*s and both drink Soma. I have not found the term *bhitti* used with reference to the Sadas, but it is used in similar contexts in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa and the Maitri Upaniṣad.


