+++
title = "Nuptial Hymns."

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

Book XIV.

⌊**Nuptial Hymns.**⌋

⌊Nuptial ceremonies.—This fourteenth book is the second of the six books
(xiii.-xviii.) that form the third grand division of the Atharvan
collection, and shows very clearly that unity of subject which is the
distinguishing characteristic of the books of that division. The book
has been translated by Weber, *Indische Studien*, vol. v. (1862), pages
178-217; and the parts peculiar to our text by Ludwig in his *Der
Rigveda*, vol. iii. (*Die Mantralitteratur*), pages 470-476. The
*bhāṣya* is again lacking.⌋

⌊The subject of the book has been often treated: thus, by that great
scholar, Colebrooke, in 1801, in vol. vii. of the *Asiatic Researches*
(the paper is reprinted in Cowell's edition of H. T. Colebrooke's
*Essays*, vol. i., pages 217-238); by E. Haas, in the volume of Weber's
*Studien*, just cited, pages 267-412, *Die Heirathsgebräuche der alien
Inder, nach den Gṛihyasūtra;* and latterly by Dr. M. Winternitz, in the
*Denkschriften* of the Vienna Academy for 1892, vol. xl., *Das
altindische Hochzeitsrituell nach dem Āpastambīya-gṛihyasūtra* etc.,
with a detailed comparison of the nuptial ceremonies prevailing among
the other Indo-European peoples. Then, some five years later (in 1897),
in the *Anecdota Oxoniensia*, Dr. Winternitz published *The
Mantra-pāṭha* or *the Prayer Book of the Āpastambins*, which contains
very many of the *mantras* cited in the editor's *Hochzeitsrituell;* and
for this reason the citations of those *mantras* are given below in
duplicate, in order that they may be easily found in either work.—Here
may be mentioned also the elaborate comments given in my *Sanskrit
Reader*, pages 398-401, upon chapters 5, 7, and 8 of Āśvalāyana's
Gṛhyasūtra, book i., which treat of the wedding customs and the
wedding-service.⌋

⌊*Division into anuvākas*.—This book is divided into two *anuvākas*, the
first with 64 verses, and the second with 75. This division is confirmed
by the Old Anukr. or *Pañcapaṭalikā* (as quoted at the end of each
*anuvāka*), which says *ādyaḥ sāuryaś catuḥṣaṣṭiḥ* and *pañcasaptatir
uttaraḥ*. Here *ādyaḥ* and *uttaraḥ* doubtless refer to *anuvākaḥ*
understood. It is also confirmed by AV. xix. 23. 24.⌋

⌊**The decad-division** is shown in the mss. as usual: thus hymn 1 is
divided into 6 "decad"-*sūktas* (5 tens and 1 "decad" of 14 vss.), and
hymn 2 is divided into 8 "decad"-*sūktas* (7 tens and 1 "decad" of 5
vss.). The sum is 14 "decad"-*sūktas*.⌋

  
⌊**Division into hymns.**—This seems to be a matter more or less
questionable. By the Berlin edition, and also by that of SPP., the book
is in fact divided into two hymns, each of which coincides with an
*anuvāka*, as is the case with books xii. and xiii. The Old Anukr. seems
to offer no evidence either for or against the division into hymns.⌋



⌊The mss. seem to support the division of the book into two hymns: thus,
at the end of *anuvāka* 1, several mss. say *anuvāke arthasūkta 1; ṛcā*
(!) *64;* \[supply presumably *daśatayaḥ*\] 6. And, at the end of the
second, they say *anuvāke arthasūkta 1; ṛcā 75*. Moreover, as noted on
page 768, some mss. sum up the book as of two hymns.⌋

⌊The Major Anukr., on the other hand, seems rather to indicate that the
book should not be divided into two hymns: 1. by its mingling the verses
of the whole book together (see the next paragraph, which is by Mr.
Whitney) in its metrical and other definitions; and 2. by its expression
*śatatamyā* \[*ṛcā*\] 'hundredth verse,' which implies a continuous
counting from the beginning of the book beyond the limits of the first
*anuvāka* (or hymn?), which contains only 64 verses. *Per contra*, this
method of designating a verse by any ordinal higher than the first few
ordinals is very unusual, and (so far as I have noted) unexampled, save
by the expression *trayoviṅśatikayā* in the next clause and by the
ordinals of Kāuś. 49. 24, 25 (see note to x. 5. 6).⌋

  
The descriptions of meter etc. are ⌊by the Major Anukr.⌋ given together
for the whole book; they are here separated for the two recognized
divisions (*anuvākas*, treated as hymns) in accordance with the method
elsewhere followed. The order of verses is so much disregarded in the
metrical etc. descriptions as to make one wonder whether the arrangement
contemplated by the Anukr. was the same with that which we have ⌊cf. p.
740, top⌋; yet minor deviations from the order are not very rare
elsewhere. Other special points are mentioned in the notes to the
verses.

⌊The Major Anukr. begins its treatment of the book as follows: *satyene
’ti* (xiv. 1. 1) *sāikonacatvāriṅśachataṁ dvayānuvākakāṇḍam. Sāvitrī
Sūryā. ātmadāivatam. ānuṣṭubham. prathamābhiḥ pañcabhiḥ* (xiv. 1. 1-5)
*somam astāut; parābhiḥ* (xiv. 1. 6-?) *svavivāham; śatatamyā* \[?\]
(xiv. 2. 36) *devān; trayoviṅśatikayā* (xiv. 1. 23) *somārkāu; parayā*
(xiv. 1. 24) *candramasam*.⌋

⌊That is to say: 'The double-*anuvāka*-hook (the expression *dvaya* is a
little strange: the phrase would fit also books xv. and xvi.) that
begins with *satyena* has \[verses\] a-hundred-and-forty-save-one (64 +
75 = 139). \[The seer is\] Sūryā,¹ daughter of Savitar (cf. AV. vi. 82.
2; xiv. 2. 30; Bergaigne, *Rel. Véd.* ii. 486 f.). The deity is the
same. The meter, *anuṣṭubh*. With the first five verses she praised (or
mentioned, *laudavit:* see note to i. 7. 1) Soma; with the next verses
(does this mean the verses from 6 to the end of the book? or to the end
of the Sūryā-hymn proper, vss. 6-16?), her own wedding; with the
hundredth verse (100 = 64 \[vss. of h. 1\] + 36 \[vss. of h. 2\]: hence
xiv. 2. 36), the gods²; with the twenty-third verse (xiv. 1. 23), moon
and sun; with the next (xiv. 1. 24), the moon.'⌋

¹ ⌊The RV. Anukr. also ascribes the corresponding RV. hymn (x. 85) to
Sūryā Sāvitrī.⌋

² ⌊This statement does not fit xiv. 2. 36. On the other hand. Dr. Ryder
points out that it does fit xiv. 2. 46 and that the RV. Anukr. makes
*devāḥ* the deity of RV. x. 85. 17 (which = AV. xiv. 2. 46): and he
accordingly offers the suggestion that *śatatamyā* may be a text-error
for *daśa-śatatamyā*.⌋

⌊The Major Anukr. continues: *parā* \[?\] (xiv. 1. 25-?) *nṛṇāṁ
vivāhamantrāśiṣaḥ. parā dehy* (xiv. 1. 25) *aślīlā tanūr* (xiv. 1. 27)
*iti dve vadhūvāsaḥsaṁsparśamocanyāu. ye vadhva* (xiv. 2. 10) *iti
yakṣmanāśanī. parā* (xiv. 2. 11) *dampatyoḥ paripanthināśanī*.⌋



⌊The statements of the RV. Anukr. as to "deity" correspond quite closely
with those just given, but with some differences: thus it says *-nindā*
for *-mocanyāu;* etc. In particular, the description *nṛṇāṁ vivāhamantrā
āśiṣaś ca* is applied by the RV. Anukr. to RV. x. 85. 20-28. All these 9
RV. verses have more or less close correspondents in AV. xiv.: they are,
respectively, AV. xiv. 1. 61; 2. 33 (cf. RV. vss. 21 and 22); 1. 34; 1.
19, 18, 20, 21, 26. All this, it seems, fails to square with the *parāḥ*
of the text of our Anukr., and reinforces Mr. Whitney's suspicion
(above, p. 739) that the arrangement of the verses contemplated by that
text may have been different from that which appears in the Berlin
edition.—In connection with this suspicion should be considered also the
fact that the Anukr. adds at the end the *pratīkas* iii. 30. 1, ii. 36.
1, and xx. 126. 1: see below, p. 768.⌋

⌊In the Major Anukr., moreover, a curious addition is inserted after the
definition of xiv. 1. 60, as follows: (the text of its beginning is
uncertain: *ity?* or *parāviny?*) *edhiṣīmahīti vyāghrādiṣv
avagantavyaḥ*. Cf. the introduction to xi. 1 and especially the note to
xv. 5. 7.⌋
</details>
