+++
title = "02 Middle Vedic"

+++

This form of the language belongs to the period of Kuru and Pañcāla on the upper Gangetic plane between ca. 1200 and 700 BCE. The name Kuru is the name of a clan. The geographical regions where clans settled were generally called after them. In the case of the Kurus, this region was the district of Meerut and the territory situated some 100 miles north of Delhi called Kurukṣetra. That general area saw not only the codification of the Rigveda, but the putting together of three other collections that, together with other compositions, became the Sāma-, Yajur- and Atharvavedas. ‘The Kuru realm,’ as Witzel put it, ‘became the center of Brahmanical culture, with Kurukṣetra as the traditional heartland of Brahmanical orthopraxy’—that is, ritual.

Leading historians of India are not in full agreement about what kind of structure that Kuru centre possessed. Burton Stein \(1998\) called Kuru a *mahājanapada* which he translates as ‘great community’, skirting around the then fashionable interpretation of *janapada* as ‘republic’. According to him, some of the ‘great communities’ became states but that was after Kuru. According to Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund \(1998\), *janapada* referred first to the ‘place of a tribe’ and then to the territory of ‘a people’, using a term that is inoffensive and a little vague. Vagueness is not inappropriate when the evidence is as meagre as it admittedly is; but it does not resist generalization which is often more vague, not less. *Mahājanapada* accordingly became ‘great territory of a people’ \(like ‘great hall of the people’\). Romila Thapar \(2002\) refers to the Kuru–Pañcāla territories as confederations, accepts their inclusion among *mahājanapada*s and adds some precision: ‘The linchpin of the *janapada* had been the ruling clan, after which it was named, and this in turn ensured some linguistic and cultural commonality. But the *mahājanapada* was also incorporating varied cultures.’

‘Varied cultures’ is undoubtedly the *mot juste*. It adds substance to received wisdom and contributes to our understanding of the Middle Vedic period by recognizing, that composing Vedas should no longer be looked upon as an outpouring of Indo-Aryan sentiment and preoccupations, but reflected a variety of languages and cultures. It had been true of the Rigveda as we have seen in Part I and again at the beginning of Part II, but applies with greater clarity and force to the composers of the Yajur- and Atharvavedas. The Sāmaveda undoubtedly came from an indigenous, non-Indo-Aryan lineage. With the Yajurveda, composing Vedas became something like a job. The Atharvaveda is replete with local cults.

The Kuru started a confederation through alliance with the lineage of the Pañcāla clan. It does not follow that the Kuru were alien immigrants and the Pañcāla indigenous inhabitants of South Asia. It does not even follow that Kuru males took Pañcāla wives. We do not know much about ‘wives’ until we come to a marriage ceremony in the tenth circle. It is true that the Rigveda emphasized the male lineage. Throughout the Vedas, ancestors are referred to as *pit*ṛ, ‘fathers’. Transmission of the Vedic tradition was and remained patrilineal. Wendy Doniger’s statement on the Rigveda remains valid for the early compositions of Middle Vedic: ‘The Rigveda is a book by men about male concerns in a world dominated by men; one of these concerns is women, who appear throughout the hymns as objects, though seldom as subjects.’ Whether as subjects or objects, they became instruments, i.e., mothers of sons. But *male* is not the same as *alien immigrant*.

We shall return to goddesses, but the chief result of the Kuru–Pañcāla alliance from the perspective of the four Vedas is that it led to several Yajurvedas and explains the increasing importance of the concept of ‘school’ or ‘branch’ \(*śākhā*\). Each school goes back to the clan, tribe or community of a particular area. The Kaṭha or Kāṭhaka school of the Yajurveda represents the tradition as practised in Kurukṣetra. The Taittirīya of the Yajurveda and the Jaiminīya of the Sāmaveda started in Pañcāla from where they went south. A selection by Kuru–Pañcāla compositions from these and other schools, combined into one vast collection, became ‘the three Vedas’ of the early Vedic canon. By the time of its first establishment, various communities started speaking Vedic and using the phrase ‘our own people’. The Yajurveda invokes Soma as a guide against ‘hostilities committed by our own people and by others’.

During the Middle Vedic period, Soma, like Agni, a material substance as well as a deity, was *ritually* combined with Agni in vast and complex rituals. Its juices are extracted from the Soma plant which is ‘pressed’ or rather, beaten with stones. The structural features of these ceremonies and their ritual significance will be addressed in Chapter 12. Such activities should, if possible, be seen and heard for they are an essential feature of Vedic civilization. Describing ritual combinations and interactions between Agni and Soma in language is not only difficult but tedious. It helps to explain that those who composed Middle Vedic prose were no longer poets, let alone seers, but had become scholars. The vision of the Rigveda is replaced by a measure of pedantry. It explains similarities in interpretation between contemporary scholars and these early predecessors. Vision would return with the Upaniṣads when contributions were made by birds of different feathers.

During the latter parts of the Middle Indic period, a large number of Yajurveda compositions were composed, especially in the school of Taittirīya, named after the partridge \(*tittiri*\) which acted as a patronymic bird. Among the sub-schools of the Taittirīya, the Ā*pastamba*s lived on the banks of the Yamuna in the region of Mathura. They produced what became a popular ritual manual, the Āpastamba Śrauta Sūtra. It describes, like other manuals, large Soma rituals, performed for the benefit of a *yajamāna* or patron. At a culmination point in the ritual, the Adhvaryu priest of the Yajurveda arrives at the main altar with a long cloth tied around his head and dragging behind him. Underneath, the *yajamāna* and his family are hidden. They are about to take up residence in a new abode and the Adhvaryu proclaims the *yajamāna* as king. The participants shout: ‘Soma is the king of us brahmans\!’ At this point there appears a rare allusion to what may well have been historical events. Āpastamba explains that the subjects of the king are Bharatas, Kurus, Pañcālas, Kuru–Pañcālas and others. It expresses at the same time and in the clearest of terms the brāhmaṇs’ wish to wrest control from kṣatriya lineages. It does not follow that brāhmaṇs were descendents from speakers of Indo-Aryan and kṣatriyas were not. It suggests that both were interested in acquiring the power or alleged power of Vedic civilization.

Kuru–Pañcāla was also the region from where the construction or reconstruction of the Atharvaveda came. Its contents came from all over the place and some may be older than the Rigveda. It took a long time before the collection was accepted by scholars and other authorities, and the collocation of ‘Three Vedas’ was accordingly replaced by ‘Four Vedas’. Buddhism never seems to have realized that there were four Vedas and not three. The *Avadānaśataka*, a collection of legends or ‘glorious events’ \(*avadāna*\), mentions three Vedas and Buddhists have asked me: ‘What fourth Veda are you talking about?’


