+++
title = "2 Choices for Livelihood"

+++

The score of capsule biographies in Chapter 3 illustrates a variety of career  options for certified Veda pandits and how the scope of personal choices has  broadened over the course of four generations. Some of those who have been  recipients of cropland and houses donated by wealthy individuals who favor  the Vedic tradition have been freed from financial concerns in order to teach,  study, and in some cases perform sacrifices. As noted, some have taken up  full- or part-time professions as domestic ritualists, Smarta Brahmans, while  others recite as ghana-pathi for remuneration. Not available to the oldest of  those selected for study here but now undertaken by most Veda pandits is  the parayana system, usually called the “TTD Scheme,” borrowing an English  term applied to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam and its program of finan cial support for Veda pandits in the form of honoraria and pensions. 

In most of the homes of Veda pandits in Konasima, a particular framed  photo, frequently garlanded, hangs on a prominent wall alongside saints and  ancestors. It is a portrait of Uppuluri Ganapati Sastri, credited with establish ing the pandits’ contractual recitation plan in the delta, a program of public  recitation, parayana, in temples large and small for two or three hours each day.  The TTD is headquartered at Tirupati in the temple complex of Venkatesvara  in the Chittor District of southern Andhra, a site now mythically famous for  seemingly incalculable wealth. From modest beginnings in 1932 during the  Madras Presidency the TTD grew through several Religious and Charitable  Endowments Acts (1951, 1969, 1979, 1987, and 2006) and the emergence of 

Vedamlo, “Living in the Veda” 39 

Andhra Pradesh as a state in 1956. Today the trust, in cooperation with the  state government, supervises a huge array of institutions, including more  than a dozen temples, associated choultries (pilgrim dormitories), hospitals,  educational enterprises, libraries, audio-recording projects (including Vedas),  and other ventures. 

Of numerous “schemes,” as they are known, the one that is of immediate  impact on the lives of Veda pandits established a schedule of monthly pay ments to qualified, that is, successfully examined pandits, who are assigned  to recite from their own sakha in designated temples. They remain unencum bered by routine activities of these temples and are entirely separate from  pujari, the priests controlling daily worship of the resident deities and distribu tion of prasada, the grace of those gods and goddesses. Rather, in the view of  TTD trustees, pandits recruited by the Devasthana promote popular apprecia tion of the Vedas as visible and audible illustrations of the living texts, even as  they serve to legitimate Vedic authority of the temples themselves. An example  is the ancient temple of Siva as Mallikarjuna and Kali as Bhramaramba on the  mountain top at Srisaila (a site mentioned in Chapter 1) as the locus of eight  Veda pandits reciting publicly, two for each Veda. 

A majority of the individuals whose lives are to be explored in the follow ing chapters signed on to this parayana program and were grateful for the  steady family income, particularly in the face of debts accrued from daughters’  marriages, divisions of properties for sons, and expenses incurred in a life  of routine or elected sacrifices. The security of a pension plan with monthly  checks after retirement from recitation duties has strong appeal. After all,  reciting in temple service simply involves a “going over” (the literal meaning  of parayana) of the same passages currently being taught to sons and grand sons. A  few, however, including two of the most prominent and regionally  famous ahitagni, insisted that the scheme was not for them and amounted  to “selling” the Veda, veda-vikriya. Furthermore, they added, it exposed their  impressionable youth to secular life with cash in hand and an inevitable spiral  of conspicuous consumption (“a motorcycle when a bicycle should do, and  so on,” muttered one elder). Both Veda and srauta suffer, they insisted, in the  environment of temple town life with its wider lens on opportunities outside  of Veda, outside of an agrahara, the proper constricted venue for Vedic life.  The TTD, in response, attempted as far as possible to assign Veda pandits to  village temples a short distance from their homes, in one case, for example,  a private agrahara shrine just a few steps out the door of an aging pandit who  had gone blind from glaucoma. A variety of opinions about the positive or  negative value of TTD salaries, special honoraria, and pension plans, as well  as central government honoraria, is cited as biographies unfold in Chapter 3.

[[40]]

Uppuluri Ganapati Sastri, who is listed first of all in Veda Pandits in India,  Volume 2, Veda Pandits in Andhra, was visited in Kakinada in November 1980  when he was ninety-two years old. His rail-thin frame gave no indication that  he could set mantras of great musicality reverberating through the rooms of  his modest house. He recited three Taittiriya Samhita passages concerning  the fire altar, the rope for the sacrificial animal, and the clay trampled by the  horse in the famous asva-medha sacrifice, each accompanied by explication  of context. His style is bardic, simultaneously story telling, chanting, and ser monizing. Astonishingly, some seventy-four years previous to that visit he had  been adhvaryu, executive priest, in an agni-stoma soma sacrifice in Kakinada  in 1906. 

The parayana program Uppuluri promoted in Konasima expanded over  the years. One innovation, for example, pertains to local Brahman societies  that wish to meet monthly on or close to samkramana, when the sun moves  from one rasi, sign of the zodiac, to another. The program requires a Veda  pandit to recite one of the initial forty-four panna in a long series that would  take some three years and eight months to complete. Today the rising sched 

ule of honoraria for temple recitations is common knowledge among pandits.  In 2005, for example, the salary for reciting ghana was Rs. 1,800 per month,  about 60 per day, and for those reciting krama it was Rs. 1,500 per month,  about 50 per day. Retired (vrddhi) pensioners, having concluded their temple  service, received Rs. 1,000, about 33 per day. At that time early in 2005, the  exchange rate was Rs. 43.7 for $1. As evident from the life histories told by  the older Veda pandits and their wives, such a plan of reliable income and  pension brought an extraordinary change from “the old days” prior to a cash  economy. It was an economic shift warmly welcomed by many, although for  most it never guaranteed freedom from new monetary worries that unexpect edly seemed to sprout like weeds in a crop field. 

Another economic opportunity came from the United Kingdom and the  United States after rapid construction of Hindu temples in major urban areas  there from the early 1970s to the present. London, San Francisco, New York,  Chicago, Houston, Atlanta, and many other cities sought Vaidika Brahman  pandits to do parayana in new temples, including those constructed accord 

ing to Silpa Sastras, Sanskrit manuals on architecture, and staffed by pujari who spoke the regional language, Telugu for Andhra immigrants. Salaries  were enticing and a Telugu-speaking community was assured. At one point  an invitation came to Sriramapuram agrahara from the Venkatesvara temple  in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, at the instigation of an Andhra Brahman living  there. The elders pulled out this mysterious letter written in English, heard  from the dora its contents, and flatly rejected the idea. A parayana assignment 

Vedamlo, “Living in the Veda” 41 

to Srisailem, Hyderabad, or Simhacalam, all in Andhra, was one thing.  Accepting a position in America, a land of Christian churches, strange diets,  weird customs, infinite temptations, was not for their sons or grandsons. 

In an earlier essay (Knipe 1997) that was a precursor to this book there  was agreement, regarding Konasima, with Frits Staal’s 1983 assessment  among the Nambudiri Brahmans of Kerala: Vaidika Brahmans had no inter est in coming to America. By the close of the 1990s, however, the situation  in Andhra was quite different. Information technology not only had become  well established in India but American corporations were now employing  adventurous and well-educated South Asians from coast to coast, including  sons and sons-in-law of Vaidika Brahmans. When they returned home their  reports about life in America did not match long-held opinions of those who  had never left the delta. But the conservative elders of Konasima still resisted.  No Veda-certified sons or grandsons should leave Andhra, although there was  no problem with laukika descendants taking employment in the West. Lanka  used a Telugu proverb to warn of the perils for a Veda pandit taking employ 

ment in America: “From a distance the mountains look soft.” 
