+++
title = "4 Bonding with Agni"

+++

Chapter 3 illustrates the ways in which these extended rituals and all their sup porting intellectual and material preparations ornament the lives of ahitagni and patni and Chapter 6 enters the ritual life in far more detail. To conclude  this chapter, however, it is instructive to review the significance of installing  the god Agni as lord of house and family, and what his presence and the obli gations of constant ritual attentions mean in the way of creating an alternative  reality. Some of this surfaces when we look at the multiple meanings of the  word agni-hotra. The god and his cult become synonymous when we see that  common parlance of ahitagni and patni employs agni-hotra to mean three sep arate entities: the daily offerings, the fires into which libations are made, and  the god Agni himself. So melded are these meanings that one nonagenarian  patni anxiously shouting “Agni-hotra! Agni-hotra!” in her final hours of breath  could have been signaling any one of the three. As Christopher Fuller has  observed of the standard Hindu worship, “Puja, at its heart, is the worshippers’  reception and entertainment of a distinguished and adored guest”15 and that  

is precisely the case with the establishment of sacred fire in the household. The fact that thousands of hours are spent addressing mantras to fires  amounts to a lifelong conversation with this elemental form of the sacred.  All know that Agni has pride of place in the Vedas: the Rg Veda, and there fore, “Veda,” begins with “Agnim ile purohitam . . .,” praise of him as visible  household priest. An entire community of deities, invited by Agni, gath ers daily with fires as cynosure and the married co-sacrificers as host and  hostess of the ritual assembly. Several ahitagni have reported what appear  to be mystical experiences, visions stimulated by prolonged engagements  with their fires and aspirations for the health and welfare of their families.16 From the student’s task of feeding the fires with kindling-stick offerings,  on through a life of agni-hotra to the final oblation, one’s own body given to  tretagni—ahavaniya, daksinagni, and garha-patya, igniting head, arms, and  midsection before burning together as one—devotion to Agni has no paral lel in the religious experience of the ahitagni. That ultimate manifestation of  the deity, the awe-inspiring and beloved god who absorbs, is Agni kravyad,  flesh-eating Agni. 

A potent aspect of the cult of Agni is the seminal notion of purity (sauca)  and impurity (asauca). Maintaining the purity of ritual fires and special areas 

[[50]]

that are out of bounds for laity is a hallmark of Vedic ritualism. In South Asia,  Vedic Brahmans are not alone in this regard. Parsis are the remnant custodi ans in India of the once-powerful Zoroastrian imperial religion of Achaemenid  Persia. Today their priests in Mumbai and elsewhere in India still wear white  masks to avoid defiling the sacred fire. Lay Parsis, whose home altars burn  incense as a form of domestic ritual fire, may not approach the temple fire.  Their Vedic cousins, also descendants of third-millennium-bce Indo-Iranian  cults of fire and the sacred plant *sauma17 are equally concerned with pro tecting sacred fires from impurity. A significant difference, however, is that  Zoroastrian tradition long ago turned to their famous Towers of Silence and  birds of prey for disposal of the dead in order to avoid defiling fire with the pol lution of death, whereas Vedic tradition retained an identification of sacrificer  and fire, including final absorption by Agni via cremation. 

To take just two examples of fire protection from Vedic practice, consider  the necessity of setting fires, adhana, and undergoing ritual consecration prior  to a soma sacrifice, the diksa. The reason given by many qualified Veda pandits  for not performing adhana, or rekindling if there has been a lapse, is the lack  of personal space, a house exclusively of one’s own. What this means, when  pressed for details, is that living in an apartment building or shared house  means inability to control the transit of those who may be impure, quite spe 

cifically, menstruating women.18 As for diksa, before performing agni-stoma or  any later soma ritual both the sacrificer husband and co-sacrificer wife undergo  a ritual equivalent of death and rebirth. This consecration of the couple pro vides access to the maha-vedi arena of sacrifice and renders them impervious  to ritual pollutions until the concluding bath, including death pollution in the  family or the onset of menses for the wife. If she menstruates, and consider ing that the paundarika is forty days in length she will do so if she has not  reached menopause, there is no need for her to leave the sacrificial ground. All  participants will be careful not to touch her as she goes on with her duties in  a secluded corner, the patni-sala, but the ritual theoretically remains undam aged thanks to the protective canopy of diksa. 

To return to the homology of sacrificers and fires, it is the case that the  agni-hotra room of the house is an area set apart from profane time and space,  just like the diksa-shielded home owners during extended rites. In fact, the  three fires (tretagni) represent a cosmos—earth, midspace, and heaven—in  a triadic symbolism as old as the first Veda. In Rg Veda 5.11.2 Agni is estab 

lished on his “triple seat,” the three altars. When a srauta ritual is scheduled,  this threefold microcosm is projected out of the house to the east to form a  macrocosmic world, a great field of fire (agni-ksetra). In the case of the several  forms of agni-cayana this ritual work founds a new world, its east-west and 

Vedamlo, “Living in the Veda” 51 

north-south axes and triple representation of Agni entirely a magnification  of the agni-hotra room. Agni is still there as priest while the deities arrive and  depart. Offerings are still transformed by Agni and serve as constant agents of  communication and connection. 

Another powerful statement of the bond between sacrificers and fires  concerns the pair of fire-kindling woods (arani) kept safely wrapped  together by every ahitagni and patni. The rectangular lower block is placed  firmly on the ground and a small hole in it receives the tip of the upper  wood that is twirled rapidly on a connecting spindle until friction causes  dry straw and sawdust to ignite. Figure 2.7 illustrates this churning of  fire (agni-manthana). The act, a procreative one involving an upper male  arani and lower female arani, requires two people, one standing to hold the  grooved spindle in place, the other to sit and twirl it by pulling a cord back  and forth in the grooves. Unless a guest rtvij is involved (as in the photo)  the pair is, appropriately enough, husband and wife generating Agni. The  arani are special wood from an asvattha tree, Ficus religiosa, found rooted  in a crevice of a sami tree, Mimosa suma, and is prized for its hardness.  In the case of transferring fire to another location there are mantras and  mystical procedures to draw ghee-activated fire into the two arani after they  are warmed over the garha-patya. A  reverse procedure releases fire from  

  

Figure 2.7. agni-manthana, “churning” of new fire with arani as fire-drill to ignite  Agni, Sriramapuram 1987. The upper male wood fixed in a spindle is twirled with  a rope, its drill point seated in the female block on the ground.

[[52]]

the arani onto kindling materials elsewhere. Alternatively, so tight is the  Agni-sacrificer connection that fires may be mystically drawn up into the  body of the sacrificer for the same ends. Thus in rare instances of traveling  away from home, the sacrificer may take fires in three separate terra-cotta  pots slung from cords, each carefully labeled garhaptaya, daksinagni, aha 

vaniya, or take only the arani, or last, assume them into his body.19 Just as Chapter 4, “Becoming a Veda,” expands further on textual learning  and application, so Chapter 6, “Becoming Agni,” delves further into ritual  life, both chapters drawing upon illustrations from the lives of Veda pandits  presented in Chapter 3. In between, Chapter 5, “Becoming a Householder,”  addresses, among other concerns, the samskara, life-cycle rituals, including  the funereal final passage. Chapter 6 provides a more detailed examination  of adhana in which a symbolic five-fire arena is first established before it is  reduced to a standard three. 
