+++
title = "1 Early Centuries"

+++

Due to the constant self-landscaping of the two rivers archeologists obtain  few results from combing within the Godavari or Krishna deltas. Inland  well west of the deltas, great ash mounds of burnt cow dung reveal tempo rary settlements of Neolithic cattle herders. Also dotted through the interior  are numerous megalithic tombs. It is estimated that Telugu developed as a  discrete Dravidian spoken language in Andhra early in the first millennium  bce. No historical records have been found, however, earlier than Sanskrit and  Prakrit inscriptions of the second century bce, and inscriptions in Telugu do  not occur for another half millennium or more. 

The first great empire in India after the Harappan Indus civilization was  the Mauryan dynasty in the northern kingdom of Magadha with a capital  in Patailaputra, modern Patna in Bihar. In 324 bce Candragupta Maurya’s  armies began consolidation of the Gangetic plain. His successor Bindusara  penetrated the Deccan and ventured onto parts of the east coast as well. Asoka,  third and best known of the Mauryan rulers, added to the empire Kalinga on  the Bay of Bengal and for a time may have controlled both the Godavari and 

8 vedic voices 

Krishna deltas. During his reign 273–32 bce Asoka left rock-cut edicts in a  Prakrit language carved mostly in Kharosthi and Brahmi scripts, the earliest  in India after the Indus script of c. 2600–1900 bce. Two edicts are north of  the deltas on the coast of Kalinga. According to tradition, Candragupta Maurya  converted to the Jaina faith and committed samlekhana, the fast to death, in  Sravana Belgola on the west coast. Asoka, from the tenor of his edicts and  late-life practice, evidently had strong Buddhist sympathies. 

Both religions were already established in the south, adding Pali as well as  Prakrit to the language mix. Sometime after 200 bce, as in other parts of India,  a stupa, a great mound embodying relics of the Buddha, was constructed at  Amaravati on the Krishna River, upstream from modern Vijayawada. Another  was built later at Nagarjuna-konda, where the Dindi River enters the Krishna,  with caitya halls for assembly and multi-celled monastic quarters (vihara).  A rock-carved caitya, a stupa, and some sixty monastic caves at Guntapalli date  to the second century bce. A number of deteriorating Buddhist monuments  still exist on the Krishna River at Jaggayyapeta and Bhattiprolu as well as other  sites eastward toward the Godavari. Some Saiva temples, in Amaravati and  Draksarama, for example, contain Siva linga that appear to be salvaged from  the ruins of ancient Buddhist marble columns. 

A number of Andhra inscriptions commemorate Vedic sacrifices, includ ing two royal ones, the raja-suya conscration of a king and the asva-medha, a  land conquering sacrifice of a successful king’s chariot horse. Two caves on  opposite sides of south India reveal significant inscriptional details, one at  Nanaghat, in the sharply defined gap in the western Ghats of Maharastra, the  other in Udayagi, Orissa, both dated as mid-first century bce. Two contempo rary kings emerge into focus here. The first is Satakarni I of the Satavahanas,  or the “Andhras” according to some Sanskrit Puranas, an enduring dynasty  that emerged from Mauryan roots in the second century bce. Satavahanas may  have originated in the Godavari Delta and expanded upriver to the headwaters  on the west coast not far from the Nanaghat cave. Origins are murky and it  is more probable that this dominion expanded in the opposite direction, west  to east. In any event, Satakarni I, imperial raja of the Satavahana capital at  Pratisthana (Paithan) on the upper Godavari, claimed to be lord (pati) of the  south (daksina-patha), and performed the great year-long drama of the Vedic  asva-medha, sacrifice of his intrepid horse that had staked out conquest with  the aid of a significant army. 

The 900 miles of the Godavari became a conduit for trade all the way from  the Arabian Sea to Konasima and the Bay of Bengal, with the Satavahanas  in control of most of the Deccan and beyond to the north. Amaravati, for a  time the Satavahana capital, became a powerful trade and pilgrimage center 

The Godavari Delta 9 

where craftsmen were renowned for bronzes of the Buddha and various ani mals. There is little historical evidence but according to Buddhist tradition  the enormously influential Madhyamika philosopher Nagarjuna lived in the  Satavahana period, perhaps in the second and third centuries ce, in the place  named for him, Nagarjuna-hill. Many kings favored Brahmans with land  grants and some took family names as “sons” of Vedic rsi such as Gotama  and Vasistha. After attaining their peak of power in the late second century ce,  Satavahanas were threatened by several tribes of Sakas from north India and it  was the Vakataka dynasty that finally replaced them in the third century. There  was an interlude of sovereignty by the Iksvaku dynasty with one king celebrat 

ing yet another asva-medha. 

The other powerful southern ruler and contemporary of Satakarni I was  Kharavela, one who also claimed adhi-pati status as ruler-in-chief over Kalinga  (Orissa and parts of modern Andhra). He was a Jaina, like Candragupta Maurya,  and was consecrated as king by the Vedic raja-suya sacrifice. Inscriptions about  him were found in the Jaina cave at Udayagiri.3 
