+++
title = "6 Vijayanagara c 1346–1564"

+++

A powerful rival to both the Hindu Kakatiyas of Warangal and the Muslim  Bahmani kingdoms arose in Karnataka as Vijayanagara, one of the largest for tifications in Asia with an eventual ten square miles within massive walls.  Lasting for almost three centuries, the “city of victory” dominated the center  of the southern peninsula from Hampi on the Tungabhadra River, a southern  tributary of the Krishna. In 1327, Muhammad Tughluq conquered the Kampili  dynasty that had succeeded the Hoysalas in Karnataka and thereby completed 

The Godavari Delta 15 

a clean sweep of Warangal and other old capitals of Deccan kings. A path was  clear for the building of a new Hindu kingdom at Vijayangara in 1336, only  twenty miles from the destroyed Kampili headquarters.17 

The fourteenth-century reign of Harihara II produced the works of two  illustrious scholars, Sayana, the gifted commentator on the Vedas, and  Madhava, founder of the Dvaita or dualist school of philosophy that directly  opposed Advaita Vedanta. Madhava countered Sankara in another respect: he  was a devotee of Visnu. Tradition insists the two were brothers although their  death dates are seventy years apart. Perhaps the most famous Vijayanagara  king was Krishna Deva Raya whose reign, 1509–29, was the centerpiece of the  Tuluva dynasty of rulers. Both the Godavari and Krishna deltas were politically  embraced under his rule and on the Coromandal coast wealthy ports such  as Masulipatam, Motupalli, and Pulicat attracted Dutch and other European  merchant settlers shortly after 1600. An effective king who forged alliances  with the Bahmani ruler Muhammad Shah, Deva Raya also drove the Gajapatis  back north into Orissa, thus ending some two centuries of hostilities with the  other great medieval Hindu kingdom in the south. That long contest pitted  two neighbors against one another, speakers of different language families,  Dravidian Telugu and Indo-Aryan Oriya. The “god-king” Deva Raya traded  successfully with the Portuguese in Goa who provided him with modern arts  of artillery. His support base for two decades was the solidarity of those he  appointed as provincial governors, nayaka (Telugu nayakudu). An enduring  expression of sixteenth-century architecture during Krishna Deva Raya’s reign  was a unique style of temple construction.18 

Vijayanagara, “City of Victory,” despite its size, wealth, and vaunted  million-man army, did not live up to its name when it was destroyed in 1564  during the battle of Talikota by an alliance of the Golconda sultanate and  two others of the five Bahmani kingdoms. That alliance did not survive long  but the Qutb Shah dynasty of Golconda was able to occupy both deltas and  Rajahmundry as well. Hyderabad, future capital of the twentieth-century state  of Andhra Pradesh, was established in 1589 a few miles from Golconda fort.  The Qutb Shah succession of Shi’a kings lasted from 1512 until Golconda fell  to the armies of Aurangzeb and Sunni Mughal rule in 1687. 

The empire of the Mughals, founded 1526, had succeeded the Delhi  Sultanate in the north but did not expand into the Deccan immediately,  not even during large-scale expansion under Akbar who ruled 1556–1605.  A seventeenth-century obstacle to Mughal authority in the western Deccan was  Sivaji (1627–80), a short but intrepid Maratha general who managed to unite  Maratha Brahmans and warrior castes, then contrived an alliance of Telugu  Brahmans and Abul Hassan, the Qutb Shah Sultan of the Golconda kingdom.16 vedic voices 

Sivaji had himself crowned universal emperor in 1674 with 11,000 Brahmans  reciting Vedas.19 While his 60,000-man army camped near Golconda Sivaji  took considerable time to worship Bhramarambha, the goddess-consort of his  namesake Siva on Sri Saila (Srisala), the remote hilltop above the Krishna  River.20 After the death of Sivaji, Mughal armies conquered the Bijapur  Sultanate capital in 1686 and in the following year Golconda fort also fell.  Maratha guerilla tactics, however, made it impossible for Mughals to secure  territory and they suffered horrendous losses while retreating northward.  Aurangzeb, emperor since 1658, having squandered his waning years in vain  attempts at pacification, died in 1707, the volatile Deccan having remained “a  bridge too far” for the Mughals. 

Aside from major and minor territorial wars among Hindu dynasties,  from the seventh century on through the medieval period religious conflicts  sprouted between Jainas and Vedic Brahmans regarding animal sacrifices.21 Although some reports may have been exaggerated, inscriptional evidence  records that Jainas suffered periodic repressions at the hands of militant Saivas  who included cultural heroes such as the poet Tikkana. Jainism, Buddhism,  Virasaivism, and Tantric Hinduism had all contested Brahmanical tradition  and each ultimately left its mark. Islam in the Deccan, however, produced  in the pre-European centuries a different response, not unlike the effect that  Christianity, another monotheistic religion with global reach, was to exert in  succeeding centuries. And it must be said that Islam and Christianity both  took on new guises in their encounters with south Indian culture and religion. 
