+++
title = "9 Creating a Modern Telugu Language State"

+++

The historian of Andhra, P. Raghunanda Rao, credits English education for  intellectual and social reforms leading to the “awakening of Andhra” from  medieval stupor.31 The University of Madras originated in 1857 and by 1873 a  government college for the Godavari Delta was established in Rajahmundry.  Labeled by the Veda pandits huna-vidya, the practice of the Huns (a  heavy-handed reference to British colonials), the Brahmans were wary of an  educational system that interfered with traditional Vedic culture.32 The English  curriculum and its enlightenment ideology did in fact produce rapid change.  A battery of educated and energetic reformers arose and coastal Andhra con tributed a fair share. The combination of traditional learning and superior  social status of Brahmans was an advantage. According to Kenneth Jones,  “between 1876–86 Brahmans accounted for 73% of all successful candidates  in Madras University.”33 

Among the Andhra luminaries three nationally influential personalities  deserve special mention, all of them born in the mid or late nineteenth cen tury. Kandukuri Virasalingam (1848–1919), born in Rajahmundry, was a lucky  survivor of childhood smallpox. Considered by many to be the most significant  Andhran of modern times, he was a tireless and aggressive social reformer. 

22 vedic voices 

He earned the enmity of traditional authorities, including the Sankaracarya of  Kancipuram and many Vaidika Brahmans, by championing female education  and widow remarriage with dramatically staged ceremonies for maximum  notoriety. 

To Virasalingam, his opponents were Lilliputians and he lampooned them  in an essay mirroring Jonathan Swift. He published journals and pamphlets,  wrote two plays, and lectured widely. Having established the first schools  for girls in 1874, as well as others for Untouchable boys, he officiated at the  first widow remarriage in Rajahmundry in 1881 and later formed the Widow  Remarriage Association for continuing ceremonies. Today a large and thriving  women’s college in Rajahmundry bears the name of his wife, Rajalaksmi.34 

Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888–1975) is a well-known name to general  readers as well as Indologists because of his highly influential books. He  translated from Sanskrit The Principal Upanishads and published Indian  Philosophy, the Philosophy of the Upanishads, an Idealist View of Life, Eastern  Religions and Western Thought, East and West: Some Reflections, and Recovery  of Faith, all between 1923 and 1955. He was the first vice president of India  in 1952–62 before serving as president in 1962–67. His distinguished roles  included Oxford University professor of eastern religion and ethics (1936–52),  chairman of UNESCO (1946–52), vice chancellor of Andhra University and  Banaras Hindu University, and chancellor of Delhi University. Born in a tradi tional Brahman family in Tirupati, he was educated there at the Hermansburg  Evangelical Lutheran Mission School where he earned a scholarship to Madras  University, thus launching a famous career. His birthday, September 5, is now  celebrated as Teachers’ Day.35 

Another Godavari Delta figure of national reputation was Pattabhi  Sitaramayya (1888–1959), born in a non-Vaidika Brahman family in Gundugola  in the same year as Radhakrishnan. By profession he was first a physician in  Machilipatnam but left practice to join the Nationalist Movement. Prominent  there from 1920 until independence, he spent eight of those years in British  prisons. After release he continued disruptive agitations toward the formation  of a separate state for speakers of Telugu.36 The labors of Sitaramayya and  many others had lasting effect: in 1956, Andhra Pradesh became the first of  India’s “language states,” 88 percent of its people being Telugu speakers. In  2013–14, agitation arose in the Telangana interior region regarding formation  of a new state divorced from the wealthier and better educated coastal zone of  the two deltas. If the central government approves, Telangana’s ten districts  will comprise the twenty-ninth state of India, Hyderabad to serve as shared  capital for the next decade. The two Godavari districts will remain among the  thirteen districts of Andhra Pradesh.

The Godavari Delta 23 

Earlier, in 1925, two districts bracketing the Vasistha Godavari were cre ated out of the former Rajahmundry District that in Arthur Cotton’s time  had been renamed Godavari District. East Godavari District had its head quarters in Kakinada while West Godavari District was governed from Eluru.  Similarly, the single polity of Krishna District was split into the adjacent dis tricts of Krishna and Guntur. Just as Rajahmundry is the largest town but not  headquarters of East Godavari, so is Vijayawada the largest town in Krishna  District while Eluru serves as the seat of governance. Rajahmundry, on the  east bank of the Godavari, is forty-two miles from Kakinada, a distance that  can be covered by express bus in one hour whereas in 1980 it usually required  three to four. 

The twentieth century is reflected in the living memories of many of the  Brahmans in this narrative. World War I, that shuddered through Europe and  the Ottoman Empire and profoundly affected North America, was scarcely  remembered by the older pandits and wives; but two decades later, World  War II, with Japanese submarines in the Bay of Bengal and some 2 million  Indians in the uniform of the British army, left impressions on those born  in the first half of the century. Soon after that war ended in 1945, however,  January 26, 1947, Independence Day for India, is a date that brought joy  to the older folks, all of them remembering Jawaharlal Nehru, “Pandit-ji,”  who lived until 1964. They also recall the local shake-up in September 1948  when the new Indian army corraled the Nizam and delivered Hyderabad,  one of the last two “princely states,” to control by the Republic of India.37 Many events, movements of the freedom fighters and the turbulent period  of independence, Gandhi’s salt march and satya-graha, emergence of the  Communist Party of India, unfolded at a far remove from the delta although  coastal Andhra contributed numerous leaders, and local newspapers kept  people informed. 