+++
title = "01 Singing in Villages and Forests"

+++

The Sāmaveda exhibits two types of chant: *grāma-geya-gāna*, ‘to be sung in the village’ and *ara*ṇ*ya-geya-gāna*, ‘to be sung in the forest’. The former are accessible and relatively popular. The latter are complex and regarded as extremely powerful. *Ara*ṇ*ya* is sometimes translated as ‘wilderness’ for that reason. The Sāmavedic perspective of the forest as something dangerous, alien and replete with powerful chants, supports the idea that they belonged to an indigenous lineage that had long been settled. Did they picture the Rigvedins, who had given them the words for their songs, as alien beings that had emerged from the forest where they were roaming about with their powerful mantras? Or was it the other way round, since even a Rigvedic composer evoked the image of a traveller, isolated and frightened because he was lost in a forest \(*Two: Archaeology and the Oral Tradition*\)? That Rigvedic poem, however, belongs to a late circle \(the tenth\) and merely shows that by that time the Rigvedins were just as settled as the Sāmavedins. All we can say is that those were golden times \(subsequently called the *Satyayuga* or ‘Age of Truth’\) at least in one respect: our planet was still replete with forests.

Charles Malamoud related *ara*ṇ*ya* to *ari* and *alien*, both meaning ‘the other’. He could not have known that Octavio Paz was to write later, that the essential and common experience of the Indic, and of the entire Old World, was the presence of that *Other*: ‘strange civilizations with their gods, technical skills, visions of this world and the next’. Paz contrasted India with the New World of the Americas, which had lived ‘in an immense historical solitude \(*Four: The Four Vedas*\)’. Malamoud was writing about Vedic Indians, Paz included them in a generalization about the entire history of the subcontinent.

‘Other’ depends, of course, on who is speaking or singing, which, in the present chapter, is the Sāmavedins. The fact that they sang in the village as well as in the forest suggests that they had already incorporated ‘the other’. But ‘the others’ were not the only ‘Vedic Indians’. The Sāmavedins were themselves Vedic Indians. Their melodies were probably pre-Rigvedic though the majority, including all the village songs, had already Vedic names \(such as *Rathantara*, ‘Excellent Chariot’\). That does not hold of the forest songs. Some of their names are non-Indo-European \(IE\), and some of these non-IE names have the structure of the vocabulary of the reconstructed BMAC language \(Staal 2004, with the assistance of Lubotsky\). I conclude that the Sāmavedins belonged to indigenous lineages that had originally spoken languages that were non-IE and that may have included the extinct language of the BMAC. Features of Vedic ritual point to the BMAC as well as we shall see.

‘Forest’ or ‘wilderness’ also characterize the Āraṇyakas which follow upon the Brāhmaṇas or are appended to them, and precede the Upaniṣads \(see Table I, *Four: The Four Vedas*\). One of the earliest Upaniṣads is called ‘Great Āraṇyaka’ \(*B*ṛ*had-*Ā*ra*ṇ*yaka*\). Renou characterized all these ‘Forest Compositions’ as ‘meta-ritual esotericism’, stressing their secretive character as well as the fact that they are still pervaded by ritual technicalities and often exhibit ritual structures. Village and forest are the two sides of Vedic life.



