+++
title = "02 Karma, Rebirth and Life after Death"

+++

The most celebrated Upaniṣadic speaker and philosopher was Yājñavalkya. The debate, recorded or imagined by the composer of the BĀU, took an unexpected turn when he was asked by Ārthabhāga what happens when a man dies. He took a number of steps and his first question was: Where does the breath of a dead person go? Yājñavalkya gave the kind of down-to-earth answer that is typical of him: ‘His breaths do not depart of him. They accumulate within his body, causing it to swell and become bloated.’ Many further questions follow, but they are not rebuffed as we shall see. Ārthabhāga asks where go speech, mind, hearing, body, self, hair, blood and semen when a man dies. Yājñavalkya provides answers to all those questions, but Ārthabhāga persists and asks: what happens to the person himself? Yājñavalkya replies: ‘My friend, we cannot talk about this in public. Take my hand, Ārthabhāga; let’s discuss this in private.’ So they leave, and talk about it. What did Yājñavalkya and Ārthabhāga talk about? They talked about:
>
> Nothing but action \(*karma*\). And what did they praise?—they praised nothing but action. Yājñavalkya told him: ‘A man turns into something good by good action \(*pu*ṇ*ya karma*\) and into something bad by bad action \(*pāpa karma*\).’ Thereupon Ārthabhāga fell silent.

This famous passage touches not so much on secrecy as on the distinction between public and private. Unlike my earlier characterizations of the Upaniṣads, it is a step away from the public domain. The common translation ‘in private’ corresponds to *na sajana* in the original. It means literally ‘not with people’. Vedic has *sa-jana* which simply means ‘with people’ or ‘public’. Later Sanskrit has *vi-jana* which means ‘without people’ or ‘private’. The Upaniṣadic words are correctly translated as ‘in private’.

Why should these apparently innocent phrases not be discussed in public? The question has been much discussed. Here are two samples, one classical and one modern.

Toward the close of the eighth century CE, the time of the great Pallava and early Chola temples and sculptures of South India, an explanation was given by Śaṇkara, the famous philosopher of the Advaita Vedānta. According to him, breath, speech, mind, blood, semen, etc., are rational topics of discussion. We may not agree with his subdivisions and explanations, but we accept that they are apt topics for a public debate. It could take place at a student society of a medical school. But the topic of Ārthabhāga’s question is different, says Śaṇkara:
>
> Different schools have imagined or construed \(the Sanskrit is: *parikalpitāni*\) different answers, e.g., nature \(the opinion of the Mīmāṃsā school, Śaṇkara’s rival\), chance \(the materialists\), time \(astrologers\), action \(followers of the Vedas\), gods \(believers in gods\), consciousness-only or emptiness \(two Buddhist schools\). When there are so many basic differences, determining the truth cannot simply be achieved by defeating the opponent \(*jalpanyāya*\).

Śaṇkara explains Yājñavalkya’s insistence on privacy by arguing that it is concerned with a different kind of topic and therefore the usual methods cannot be applied. What then did they really talk about? Śaṇkara says: ‘Having agreed on time, action and gods, they praised only good action which is enjoined by the tradition. Since bad is the opposite of good, it follows that the opposite holds for bad.’ Śaṇkara’s explanation, that these are matters of choice and not of logic, confirms that he was a Vedāntin or follower of the Vedic tradition. It is a flaw in a philosopher, magnified when attributed to an ancient sage, because the Vedānta is closer to a religion than to a philosophy; but that is not the point. It is a rational explanation for Yājñavalkya’s insistence on privacy.

The only modern author, who has addressed the question, has offered a different but equally rational explanation: a famous anthropologist and original thinker, Gananath Obeyesekhere. In his book *Imagining Karma*, he has shown that among the world’s eschatologies, *rebirth* is the default option. It occurs among Buddhists, Greeks, moderns and in small indigenous societies of West Africa, Melanesia and North America. But Obeyesekhere has another item on his agenda. He is concerned with showing that the Buddhist concept of rebirth is ethical because it employs the same terms, good action \(*pu*ṇ*ya karma*\) and bad action \(*pāpa karma*\), which he interprets as referring to ‘religious merit’ and ‘sin’, respectively. He attributes Yājñavalkya’s desire for privacy to the fact, that knowledge of karma and rebirth was new to the Vedic tradition. That is far from obvious, but a discussion of this problem has not so far been undertaken. It shows that Vedic studies are still replete with unexplored treasures.

Traces of rebirth are found not only in the Rigveda, but are connected with a general belief expressed in many Indo-European sources, and elsewhere, that departed ancestors return as birds. In the Rigveda, these birds may take up a human body in the same family from which they departed before they became birds. The Brāhmaṇas take a different line: man is born first from parents, then through ritual, and a third time through the fire of cremation. In all these cases, ascension to the place of the ancestors is regarded as temporary which implies that rebirth is an option.

In the Sāmaveda, return to earth from the next world may be effected by chanting *stuti*s. The Tāṇḍya Mahābrāhmaṇa explains: ‘Just as one, having climbed up to the top of a big tree, would get down by taking hold of branch after branch, so he gets down onto this earth by means of this arrangement of *stuti*s, in order that he may get a firm support’ \(translation Yasuke Ikari\).

Quotations from the Sāmaveda may support Obeyesekhere’s idea, that rebirth is not Vedic, if it is true, as I have argued, that the Sāmavedic chants belonged to an indigenous lineage. But the Rigveda itself and other Vedic sources have other relevant things to say.

Funeral mantras from the Rigveda allude to meetings with the ancestors through an entity called *iṣṭāpūrta*, the reward of the correct performance of ritual and good deeds: ‘Unite with the ancestors, with death, with your *iṣṭāpūrta* in the highest heaven. Leaving behind all imperfections, come home again; merge with a \(new\) glorious body’ \(RV 10.14.8\). Elsewhere, Agni is asked to treat the body, that has been burnt at the cremation, gently: ‘Set him free to go back to the ancestors, Agni, when he freely wanders having been offered to you with the funeral meal. Dressed for a new life, he descends again to those who stayed behind. Let him merge with a new body, O Knower of Men\!’ \(RV 10.16.5\).

Apart from mantras, it is funeral rites that provide the most telling evidence. Yasuke Ikari had already drawn attention to one such rite that suggests that the grandfather is reborn as his great-grandson. Similar cases occur in a variety of cultures Obeyesekhere has discussed. The largest number of references to *iṣṭāpūrta* from a great variety of Vedic sources is provided by P.V. Kane in Vol. II, Part II of his *History of Dharmaśāstra*. We will need renewed study of Vedic funeral rites, neglected since Caland’s pioneering monograph of 1896, reprinted in 1967. Many are still performed in corners of the subcontinent, in Gokarna, for example.

The two Rigvedic verses I have quoted belong to the late tenth circle—composed, say, around 1,100 BCE. Similar verse from the Atharvaveda may belong to a slightly later period. The lateness of the two verses may support Obeyesekhere.

I have kept for last the most widespread Vedic idea about karma as rebirth which requires less discussion because it is so well known. It operates with a cyclical concept of time and two paths, the path of the ancestors \(*pit*ṛ*yāna*\) and that of the gods \(*devayāna*\). Those who take the former, associated with the moon, return to earth. Those who take the latter, associated with the sun, do not return but go to the world of the gods.

I have gone far enough to show, that Gananath Obeyesekhere’s book has opened up new vistas of which the end is not even in sight.


