+++
title = "06 The Two Main Contributions of the Upaniṣads"

+++

If I were asked to point at the greatest contributions of the Upaniṣads and the Vedānta, I would mention two. The first is public discussions and rational dialogues without restraints \(e.g., ‘political correctness’\). Rational discussions never existed between the two Jaina sects, who did not talk to each other, but survived in Indian philosophy, in the Buddhist Councils, in the Council of Lhasa that allegedly took place between Indian and Chinese Buddhists, and among Tibetans, though no longer in Tibet itself. In India, they continued to exist in religious contexts, at least until half a century ago in Kanchipuram, when I looked up at the leaders of the two main Viśiṣṭādvaita schools or sects, arguing with each other, high above me on elephant back and surrounded by throngs of followers. The name of one was Prativādam Bhayaṃkaram, ‘Terrible Refutation’. Logic and religion combined in one fantastic spectacle. What a lesson for the twenty-first century\!

The second great contribution of the Upaniṣads goes deeper into the recesses of human thought. It is insight in the nature of knowledge as a guide to what is reality as distinct from the appearances. This kind of insight is different from the literally superficial knowledge to which Behaviourism or Phenomenology aspire, and altogether different from what is believed by many people who have not given the matter much thought. It lies at the heart of modern science, whether it is theoretical physics or genetics, which is a search for features of reality that are hidden. The general theory of relativity, quantum theory or the theory of DNA, all deal, or dealt in their original form, with ‘things’ that lie behind and beyond the appearances. They are not enumerations of facts; they are not *sa*ṃ*khyā* or ‘enumeration’, they are *theories.* A simple example comes from the theory of heat: what appears to us as heat, viz. the appearances, is due to the movement of particles, viz. the underlying reality. The faster the particles move, the hotter it feels to us. The phenomena or appearances are studied in another science: thermodynamics. Though it deals with appearances, it is not superficial: it led to the discovery of entirely new concepts such as *entropy*.

Many philosophers, worldwide, have made the distinction between reality and appearance. The Upaniṣads do so throughout. The Muṇḍaka distinguished explicitly between a lower and a higher knowledge. The Advaita Vedānta thrives on it. The Platonic tradition is its European counterpart, but with an important difference to which I return in a moment. Other philosophers have felt uneasy about something that appeared to them to be metaphysical. But it is not meta-physical: like all theoretical science, it is meta-phenomenological. It seeks true knowledge behind the phenomena.

Even brilliant thinkers have been deceived. Young Bertrand Russell took on the bastion of Hegelian thought in the form it was defended by a British Hegelian, F.H. Bradley, whose chief work was entitled *Appearance and Reality*. Russell had a good time with it. Bradley wrote before Einstein, but not before Maxwell’s *Theory of Electromagnetics*, Marx, Freud or Darwin, all pointing at realities behind the appearances. Russell, primarily a logician and mathematician, did not realize at the time, that those discoveries were about concealed realities. That was discovered by the Upaniṣads as it was by Plato. Modern civilization would not exist without it.

The Upaniṣadic insight is deep and speculative but we should not be blind to its limitations. It tells us that the world as it appears is not real, but does not explain how it comes about; Śaṇkara declared that it could not be done. Science demonstrates that it can be done though it is not final. That, of course, is obvious to everyone who gives it some thought; though there are scientists who do not seem to understand it themselves.

That the theories of theoretical physics are theories does not mean that anything goes: they are highly confirmed. According to Roger Penrose, Newton’s theory of gravity is accurate to one part in 107 and Einstein’s General Relativity to one part in 1014. In the Upaniṣad, *jñāna* is not so confirmed. Vedic sciences were improved upon by later scientists. Later Indic thought stressed the opposite: regress all the way down from the *Satyayūga.* Perhaps it can apply somewhere, I am unsure about ethics and/or moral or immoral behaviour, but if there is progress anywhere it is in knowledge. The history of science has demonstrated it. It does not imply that Keppler or Einstein deserve more respect than Yājñavalkya or Śākalya but millennia have intervened. If my book has succeeded in showing that it makes a difference because history does, I shall be pleased.

That book has come to its own Vedānta, but not to its end: it has reached the end of the long development that led to the canonization of the compositions that are listed and related to each other in Table I. Though there is much I have ignored or neglected, we have reached the end of the Veda. What remains to be done?

We must look at the forest behind the trees. With so much material on our hands that has not yet been explained, we have to turn to a more analytical form of exposition and try to find out whether it may assist our understanding.


