+++
title = "02 Moving South and East"

+++

Part I emphasized links of Vedic civilization with Central Asia and the Near East. Part II showed how that civilization moved south-east, adapted itself on the subcontinent to a new environment, interacted with other cultures and began to settle down. Ritual, history and geography illustrate how those settlements moved further east. Figure 16 shows how the Ritual Arena for the Soma ceremonies corresponds to the historical map of Central Asia including Vedic India. The officiating priests are not aware of those correspondences and they remain unexpressed by the large majority of our sources.

The three arrows on the historical map, two earlier and one slightly later, depict the movements of Indo-Aryan. They originate from the Central Asian homeland, around the BMAC \(3 and 6 on the Frontspiece\), where speakers of Indo-Aryan or Proto-Indo-Aryan made offerings on a flat piece of soil on which a fire had been installed. It survives in the Ancient Hut on the left or west of the Ritual Arena where the flat piece of soil has been replaced by small altars as in Figure 15. The fire embers were carried in a pot to wherever the family pitched its tent. It corresponds to the carrying of fire to the new home of the ritual patron as mentioned in Chapter 7. The western part of the Ancient Hut was reserved for the patron’s wife and the remaining space was used for domestic or quasi-domestic rites, and functioned as a kitchen for the preparation of food or offerings to the gods. Because of its domestic character, the Ancient Hut is surrounded by walls, like the Sadas but for different reasons: the protection and privacy of the wife.

To the east of the Ancient Hut a new enclosure is constructed. Its first structure is the Sadas which points to Pirak, where the earliest excavated Vedic altars come from. Their extraordinary shapes are similar to those of the altars in front of which the Rigvedins recite their *śastras* \(Figure 20\). To the east of the Sadas is the enclosure where the Soma is prepared and kept. It is connected with Mount Mūjavat in the Pamirs, near the source of the Oxus, where the best Soma came from. At the eastern end, the bird-shaped offering altar represents the Kuru area where, around 1,000 BCE, the Yajurveda and the other Vedas were composed and the ritual piling of the Agnicayana took place for the first time.

Moving east within the ritual enclosure does not *mean* moving east from the Indus to the Ganges Valleys, but the correspondence with the outside world need not surprise us: facing east, which is ritually auspicious, is also the direction of the rising sun, and the same holds for the clockwise circumambulations that are common in many rituals of the northern hemisphere.

The basic movements are defined by all the ritual sūtras and most authoritatively by the Śrauta Sūtra of Baudhāyana. It declares at the outset of the list of metarules with which it begins: ‘Facing east \(*prāṇmukham*\), turning to the right \(*pradakṣiṇam*\), invested with the sacred thread, he performs the divine rites.’ ‘He,’ the subject of *karoti karmāṇi* \(‘he performs the rites’\) is the default officiant: the Adhvaryu priest of the Yajurveda, the Veda to which Baudhāyana belongs. The Adhvaryu is the organizer and manager of the ritual, whose historical task was the incorporation of Rigvedic recitations and Sāmavedic chants, specifically the *śastras* and *stutis*. The notion of default occurs in the Śrauta Sūtras as we shall see in Chapter 14 \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*\). But we have not explained why the Adhvaryu hid these important contributions behind walls.


