+++
title = "04 Facing All Directions"

+++

Baudhāyana described the ancient paradigm: ‘Facing east \(*prā*ṇ*mukham*\), turning to the right \(*pradak*ṣ*i*ṇ*am*\), invested with the sacred thread, he performs the divine rites.’ In the course of the development of the Śrauta ritual, between say 1100 and 900 BCE, a paradigm change took place. ‘Facing east’ was replaced by ‘facing all directions’ \(*sarvatomukham*\). It is explicitly specified for the *Agnicayana* altar where, on each layer, the bricks are arranged and consecrated in specific directions. What applies to the directions of bricks applies to the directions of the officiants themselves. Baudhāyana repeats it five times in his Śrauta Sūtra formulations, at the beginning of each of the five layers and with the help of two statements which I shall put between single quotes. They quote metarules \(*Fourteen: Sūtra: Vedic Sciences*\) \(between double quotes\) as is their wont. First he says: ‘Metarules like “he deposits them toward the east, he deposits them toward the west” denote the series of bricks when there are groups.’ Then he continues: ‘Metarules like “he deposits it toward the east, he deposits it toward the west” indicate that the agent who does the depositing faces in that direction.’ He mentions east and west explicitly but it is obvious throughout that it applies to all the four directions.

The new paradigm explains two things, one about the Yajurvedins, the other about the Sāmavedins. The Yajurvedins, who took over the organization of the ritual during Kuru times, had to accommodate two rival parties and thereby created the edifice first of three, then of four Vedas, sealed their canonization and tried to safeguard the supremacy of the Vedas and of themselves for all times.

The case of the Sāmavedins is special as we have seen. The words of the original, indigenous Sāmaveda chants are lost; but we know something about them because of some of their names and the names of some of the altars with which they were associated. They are non-Indo-European: some have a recognizably BMAC structure and a few are Dravidian. The words of the Rigveda often do not fit and the melodies seem to reflect another language.

What do we know about the development of ritual during those periods? We possess a fragmentary knowledge of Rigvedic rites and know nothing or next to nothing about the rites of the ancestors of the Sāmavedins. The development of Vedic Śrauta ritual started with their halting cooperation and was subsequently organized, systematized and brought to completion by the Yajurvedins during the Kuru period. Reciters and chanters were familiar with other ritualists and ritual constructions, representatives of more distant or eccentric groups \(some from the BMAC\), but it is cooperation with each other that they primarily sought. At the stage of development depicted in the original or proto-Sadas, that cooperative effort was in its infancy. Later it became more universal as signalled by the paradigm change to ‘all directions’.

During the mature Kuru period, Rig- and Sāmavedins had lived in the same surroundings and society for some time. First they were rivals who could not and did not want to understand or communicate with each other, let alone enquire or learn about each others myths and speculations or teach their own. It goes a long way to explain, that Vedic Śrauta ritual has nothing to do with Rigvedic mythology. It is a characteristic of all ritual, its mantra counterpart occurs in Kautsa and there are exceptions in more modern developments \(e.g., in contemporary performances in Kerala\) and in the Shingon ritual of Japan. Even so and on the whole, it is characteristic of Vedic ritual, and apparently of Indic rituals in general, that they continue to live a life of their own. They have to be performed in the correct manner as we have seen in Chapter 12 and that is all there is to it.

Such a situation is common in music, dance or science and shows where ritual belongs. Musicians are able to cooperate closely without being able to converse, understand or read the same language. It applies to singers, orchestras or chamber music—Caland likened the ritual ensemble of the four Vedas to a string quartet—especially when there are last minute substitutes, visiting performers or alien maestros. Scientists are also able to cooperate closely without knowing each other’s natural language. What they need to understand is artificial languages such as the language of algebra \(to which we return in a wider context in Chapter 15\). Rituals, mantras and equations are like dance of which Isadora Duncan said: ‘If I could tell you what it meant, there would be no point in dancing it.’


