+++
title = "1 Riverine Lifelines"

+++

Human imagination is drawn into reverie by many natural phenomena,  among them fires, cloud patterns, solar and full-lunar appearances and dis appearances, the rhythmic pounding of ocean surf on rocks or a broad sand  beach. There is also fascination in the seasonal changes of a great river. T. S.  Eliot began a poem1 with such in mind: 

I do not know much about gods, but I think that the river 

is a strong brown god. 

With its source near Nasik only fifty miles from the Arabian Sea, the  900-mile-long Godavari River cuts a diagonal course across the Deccan pla teau before it delivers sumptuous brown waters into the Bay of Bengal. At  the beginning point of its delta near Rajahmundry it may in full flood be well  over two miles wide. To appreciate the true character of the Godavari, how ever, it should be studied in all of its seasons. In bursting monsoon depths  it shakes the surrounding earth like the ferocious goddess it is known to be,  great brown folds of water overlapping and tearing away chunks of the levee  that are carried scores of miles to end up on the floor of a delta that has broad ened this way for hundreds of thousands of years. The roar of rushing water  sixty feet deep is as awesome as the sight. Little boys who cannot swim spot  great trees or branches hurtling downstream and hurl themselves with more  guts than foresight from the levee on “Godavari-horse” palm pontoons. They  arm-paddle out wildly, and if they do not drown, intercept and steer potential  firewood to a shore many miles down this monstrous water chute. But the  seasonal rhythm always turns to its opposite, the dry period when a stream  becomes so docile that cows may saunter and cow-paddle from bank to bank6 vedic voices 

where hundreds of new sand islands have appeared. These lanka islands, as  they are called in Telugu, are settled by fishermen who erect mud-and-thatch  dwellings; raise tobacco and vegetable crops; keep chickens, pigs, and goats;  and after sundown light oil lamps that appear from distant levees as a new 

born Milky Way across the silent river. The washing-all-away season will cer tainly follow, but for now, Godavari land is free for the taking. The great river meanders eastward, then southeastward for most of its  journey across the Deccan until it emerges from the rumpled Eastern Hills at  the Papikondulu, the “Sinful Hills,” a curious name for a gorge of breathtak ing beauty and star-rich night skies at the southernmost rim of the Northern  Circar range. Here the river drops south onto the alluvial plain that separates  the Telangana plateau from the sea and in just thirty miles it reaches the apex  tip of the delta. Down at the delta’s base on the Bay of Bengal coast, the spread  of riverine drainage from a tenth of India’s land is nearly a hundred miles.  Atlas cartographers usually illustrate three or four broad streams between  Rajahmundry and the sea. Local perception, however, declares a region of  seven rivers, mythically labeled for the seven rsi, the famed seers who first  intuited the Vedas and whose descendants comprised the seven founding  Vedic lineages, namely, Visvamitra, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Gotama, Atri,  Vasistha, and Kasyapa. Few people can name more than a sage or two, but  many tell of encounters with these rsi progenitors who still grace—or haunt— the delta with their presence. Sometimes they are glimpsed briefly in the mist  that rises from the river before dawn, no more remarkable to locals than Irish  folk who claim that a seal now and then emerges from the sea to live among  them as a young woman. Several ahitagni bathe daily in a stream they call  the Kausika, Kusika being another name of the rsi Visvamitra. And it is the  broad Vasistha that separates two zones featured in this study, East and West  Godavari Districts. 

Of course, virtually all the great rivers of India are known as goddesses  and the Godavari is no exception. Goddess Godavari stands aboard a makara,  a crocodile-like raft, looking watchfully down from the walled levee at  Rajahmundry, as if on guard against her own excesses. Until the 1970s there  were indeed crocodiles in this part of the river.2 She is conflated not only with  goddesses Gautami and Ganga (as the south Indian “extension” of the north  Indian Ganges) but also Veda Mata, Mother of the Vedas. Either way, seven  male sages on one hand, or the feminized collection of their insight on the  other, the great river calls attention to the Vedic mystique. 

At the heart of the delta, a sort of cockeyed triangle within a triangle, is  Konasima, a prize canal-rich zone bracketed by the Vainateya and Gautami  branches of the Godavari, blessed with some forty-five inches of annual 

The Godavari Delta 7 

rainfall. Vengi, a historic name for the fertile stretch of Andhra coast between  the Godavari and Krishna deltas, drew the earliest settlements to southeast  India, and Konasima became the nucleus of the northerly delta. This is the  setting of this book, a lush area, a million irrigated acres of broad wetland  rice paddies and coconut palms, the two major crops, as well as sugarcane  and betel on irrigated tracts and on dry land cotton, peanuts, pulses, sesame,  tobacco, mango, citrus, cashew, jackfruit, areca, and banana groves laced with  turmeric, tapioca, betel vines, chili peppers, and other managed plants. 

Its reputation is the zone where everything grows plentifully, luxuriously,  a cornucopia, and for folks coming from crowded urban lanes it is an arama,  a pleasure garden. Today the roadways are lined with nursery displays selling  flowers, shrubs, trees, and planters to visiting townsfolk, more and more of  them in the private cars of the new millennium’s affluent middle class. Paddy  fields, with two or even three crops a year, are always visible and rice is anna,  “food.” If one has not eaten rice in each meal one has not eaten. Carefully  guarded and numbered coconut palms, with a nut-producing life of seventy to  eighty years, grow fifty to an acre and every farmer cultivates them for a steady  income from meat, milk, oil, and husks beaten into coir or used for fuel. “A  coconut tree is more reliable than a son,” is a familiar Telugu proverb. 
