+++
title = "IV. Book the fourth"

+++

<details><summary>Whitney</summary>

Book IV.

⌊The fourth book is made up of forty hymns, divided into eight
*anuvāka-*groups of five hymns each. The normal length of each hymn, as
assumed by the Anukramaṇī, is 7 verses; but this is in only partial
accord with the actual facts. There are twenty-one hymns of 7 verses
each, as against nineteen of more than 7 verses each. Of these nineteen,
ten are of 8 verses each; three are of 9 and three are of 10; two are of
12; and one is of 16 verses. The seven hymns which make the Mṛgāra group
(hymns 23-29) have 7 verses each. And they are followed by a group of
four Rigveda hymns (30-33). The last two hymns of the book (39-40) have
a decided Brāhmaṇa-tinge. The entire book has been translated by Weber,
*Indische Studien*, vol. xviii. (1898), pages 1-153.⌋

⌊Weber's statement, that there are twenty-two hymns of 7 verses each and
two of 9, rests on the misprinted number (7, for 9) at the end of hymn
20.⌋

⌊The Anukr. states (at the beginning of its treatment of book ii.) that
the normal number of verses is 4 for a hymn of book i., and increases by
one for each successive book of the first five books. That gives us, for

|        |     |      |       |      |     |                     |
|--------|-----|------|-------|------|-----|---------------------|
| Book   | i\. | ii\. | iii\. | iv\. | v., | as normal number of |
| Verses | 4   | 5    | 6     | 7    | 8,  | respectively.       |

In accord therewith is the statement of the Anukr. (prefixed to its
treatment of book iv.) that the seven-versed hymn is the norm for this
book: *brahina jajñānam iti kāṇḍaṁ, saptarcaṁ sūktaṁ prakṛtir, anyā
vikṛtir ity avagachet*.⌋
</details>
