+++
title = "01 The Thesis of Kautsa"

+++

One much neglected thinker probably belonged to the Atharvaveda school of Śaunaka: Kautsa. The name is uncommon but not unknown. An early treatise on phonetics and phonology of the Śaunaka school is sometimes referred to as ‘Kautsa’s Grammar’. It is available in a recent critical edition with translation into English and extensive notes by Madhav Deshpande. The same name is associated with a work that has been lost but that presented a thesis that is well known. It has been much maligned but plays a major role in the history of ideas. In our present context, it occupies a special place: for as I am winding up my account of the four Vedas, we are approaching a more analytical treatment of some of the facts that have been assembled and the author of the thesis combined a vast knowledge of linguistics and mantras with an analytical mind.

The second Kautsa was a grammarian-cum-ritualist and keenly aware of the *difference* between language and mantras. His thesis was that, unlike language, of which meaning is the defining characteristic, ‘mantras are without meaning’: *anarthakā mantrā*ḥ. Kautsa may have articulated these views during the period of the middle Upaniṣads, say, around the fifth or fourth century BCE. It could be the same date as that of the Kautsa Grammar of the Śaunaka school though the latter does not even contain the term *mantra* and there are no indications, as far as I know, that the two Kautsas were the same. The name has an ominous ring. Though it is directly derived from Kutsa, the name of a seer, it is ultimately derived from a verb *kuts-* which means ‘despise’ or ‘revile’. Not to encourage prejudice, I shall call him ‘Kautsa’.

The period I mentioned was a revolutionary period during which many radically new perspectives were voiced. The second Kautsa was a revolutionary, but unlike many Upaniṣadic sages, he gave reasons for his views. It reflects his background, training and familiarity with early stages of Indic linguistics as well as the Rigveda.

It is not surprising that Kautsa works have been lost. Fortunately, some of his arguments have been preserved by his main critics in two different sources: the Nirukta, a treatise on etymology that is still assigned to the Vedas as a special science, and the Sūtra manual of the Mīmāṃsā school of ritual philosophy, composed some two centuries later, around the second century BCE.

It is unfortunate that all our information on Kautsa comes from opponents, but it is counterbalanced by an attractive feature of Sanskrit philosophical and scientific works: it is not uncommon for authors to provide fair summaries of their opponents’ theses. This commendable habit need not be entirely due to fairness: at the time of the earliest preserved opponents, the composers of the Nirukta, Kautsa works may have still have been around in the Oral Tradition. It would narrow down their own date to roughly the fourth century BCE, sealing off the Vedic period.

According to the Nirukta, Kautsa provided six arguments for his thesis, each except the first accompanied by two or more illustrations from the Rigveda. The manual of the Mīmāṃsā quotes a few others without referring to Kautsa explicitly. I shall mention the most perspicuous and give the clearest examples I can find, sometimes from a commentator:

1. In the Veda, the order of words may not be changed as is generally the case in Vedic or Sanskrit which are languages in which word order is basically free: since the inflected endings of the words convey their function, changing the order of words does not affect the meaning. It is different in the case of mantras: *agna āyāhi vītaye* \(*Six: Sāmaveda*\) may not be replaced by *āyāhi vītaye ‘gne* \(with a difference due to sandhi\) though both mean exactly the same: ‘O Agni, come to the feast\!’
2. The *sound* of the mantras may not be changed: words may not be replaced by synonyms, other words that mean the same as is common in ordinary language: the mantra *agni āyāhi vītaye* may not be replaced by *vibhāvaso āgaccha pānāya* ‘O fire god, proceed to the drinking\!’
3. Vedic mantras sometimes address inanimate objects such as stones or herbs, or things that do not exist, e.g., a being with four horns, three feet, two heads and seven hands.
4. If mantras were meaningful, it would have to be admitted that they sometimes contradict each other: one mantra asserts that there is only one Rudra, there never was a second, and another refers to ‘the innumerable thousands of Rudras’.
5. There is a tradition for mantras to be learnt by heart, but no corresponding tradition to teach and thereby preserve their meaning.

Since ordinary language exists for the sake of conveying meaning, Kautsa concluded that mantras are unlike the statements of ordinary language. This should not be interpreted as a form of scepticism or positivism. It is a purely ritualistic stance that limits mantras to their ritual use just as language is for the sake of meaning. Since the *Śrauta* ritual of the Yajurveda is performed for its own sake, it would be anachronistic to interpret Kautsa’s views in terms of later views, such as the more philosophic Upaniṣadic or Buddhist emphasis on knowledge \(*jñāna*\) or wisdom \(*prajñā*\) as a means toward enlightenment, or the more religious preaching of loving devotion of the later bhakti cults in which the soul is lifted up by the grace of a personal divinity. Even India’s greatest philosopher, Śaṇkara, an unquestioned follower of the Upaniṣads, quotes with approval a brāhmaṇa that declares: ‘he who teaches a mantra or officiates at a ritual with mantras without knowing their composer-seer, metre, deity and brāhmaṇa, will run his head against a pole or fall into a pit.’ In this list of requirements, Śaṇkara does not include knowledge or meaning: all he demands are formal data transmitted together with recitations. The triplet deity-composer-metre consists of recited names, as we have seen in Chapter 3. The brāhmaṇa itself is another recitation.

In Indic usage, mantras are meaningless from which it follows that they cannot be true or false. In modern English, ‘mantra’ is used in a different manner: it refers to a statement that is not meaningless but hollow, false and cynical. If an editorial in the *International Herald Tribune* says about the Bush administration’s statement ‘the economy is strong and getting stronger’ that it is a mantra, it means that it is a lie and that the opposite is true. In another respect, English and Indic mantras are the same: they are effective if and only if they are repeated incessantly.

With the Atharvaveda we seem to have come to the end of our survey of the four Vedas. We have seen that the Atharvaveda stood apart from the others though there are undoubted links; and that it probably gave rise to a philosophical thesis that affects the heart of the Veda. But we have not really come to the end. A glance at the table on *Four: The Four Vedas* demonstrates that we have so far mainly treated the Vedic Saṃhitā sections which constitute the core and are the oldest parts of the collections. There are several other important categories of Vedic works, including the Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads. We have looked at Brāhmaṇas of the Yajurveda because they are sometimes mixed with Mantra Sections, but there are Brāhmaṇas elsewhere. They will be combined with the Āraṇyakas and discussed in Chapter 9. The Upaniṣads are the topic of Chapter 10 but their list is open: Table 1 shows two names of Upaniṣads under the category of the Atharvaveda that are followed by ‘etc.’. Some other Vedic and many post-Vedic Upaniṣads that were looking for a home have been artificially attached to the Atharvaveda. The one remaining category of the Table, the Śrauta Sūtras, are the topic of Chapter 12.



