+++
title = "1 Lanka (1912–1999)"

+++

At 2:30 on a sunny February afternoon, three men are already waiting on the  verandah steps. After some time, Lanka, on the arm of a granddaughter, appears  unsteadily with badly swollen knees, eyes squinched against the brightness. He  is deposited slowly, carefully into the dimple between stacks of books and papers,  his work-nest. Heavy gold earrings tug his earlobes down, wide gold rings cover  four fingers of the right hand, a gold armband rides as a torque on a pale fore 

arm, and a crystal-bead necklace hangs over a bare torso that reveals his white  cotton thread between sharply pointed breasts. His eyes strain for a glimpse, 

[[98]]

the toothless white-bearded face crumples with the pain of being unwell at  eighty-four, and his voice emerges almost inaudibly but cheerily, welcoming all. Two of the men respectfully request his judgment regarding the timing of  a marriage. Lanka consults a Pancanga, eyebrows nearly touching the pam phlet, gives his verdict, but so softly that one man asks him kindly to repeat.  The other man tries to leave a five-rupee note but is waved away. The third  man, quite young, holds up two sticks about eight and ten inches long. They  are the heights, he explains, of two murtis, images of deities that have been  in his household for generations but are no longer worshipped. “How should  I go about donating them to a temple?” 

Three more men approach, identify themselves loudly and briskly by sur names so Lanka knows them to be Brahmans and can gesture them past the  arugu and over his feet where they can sit inside the more privileged thresh old to the main hall. They are from Ambajipeta, just passing through on no  real mission; they simply want to pay respects. In other words, they seek dar san, auspicious sight, of the great man of the region. Touching Lanka’s feet  and their own foreheads three times each they back away, as from a deity or a  Maharaja, relinquishing the arugu to the dora and the Andhra University pro fessor for a two-hour discussion of Veda and srauta. The view from his bucolic  study is stunning as always, a half dozen shades of green glowing from soaking  paddy fields, coconut fronds, tapioca leaves, and distant foliage. (See Figure 3.11,  Lanka, his rice fields and coconut palms in view, Nedunuru, 1991.)

  

Figure 3.11. Lanka, Nedunuru 1991, his rice fields and coconut palms in view. 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 99 

The elevation of Lanka Venkatarama Sastri as the Andhra Veda pandit  most learned in srauta since the demise of Renducintala Yajulu and Kapilavayi  Yajnesvara Agnihotra Sastri is not immediately perceptible. He delayed set ting fires until relatively late, put off agni-stoma beyond normal requirements,  performed for himself no further srauta after yajna, and allowed his fires to  lapse some thirteen years before his death. The reputation of this universally  respected man who garnered status normally granted only to renunciants, was  built on two remarkable achievements in knowledge: appropriately, Veda and  srauta. Lanka was sometimes called abhinava, the “new” Apastamba, in recog 

nition of his prowess in the indispensable ritual sutras. He had diverse knowl edge of Veda beyond the Taittiriya corpus, including considerable Rg Veda,  selected portions of Athar Vaveda, and acquaintance with the inner workings  of Sama Veda. He served as examiner for Veda, srauta, Dharmasastra, and was  consulted on jyotisa. As brahman he was required to know all the rtvij roles  for mantra as well as kriya. Lanka wrote and published in Sanskrit as well as  Telugu. Second, although yajamana only for his own adhana and agni-stoma,  he had such command of the Brahmana texts and ritual sutras that he was  able to supervise every detail of major srauta performances. By the time he  performed agni-stoma himself he may well have been the most experienced  adhvaryu in India. 

Beyond his sharpness of mind, however, was a manifest dispassion of  soul that earned widespread admiration. In sabhas he always demonstrated  equanimity and spoke in soft, measured tones only after careful reflection on  the subject at hand. When the TTD requested Baballa to fill a salaried posi 

tion, Baballa shouted “Not for ahitagni!” Lanka simply ignored them. When  a tuphan (typhoon, cyclone) roared up the delta from the Bay of Bengal on  November 5, 1995, tore the roofs off houses, destroyed coconut palms, crop fields, and livestock, the whole region was in shock. Lanka, located where trees,  cows, goats, and homes disappeared and heavy roof-tiles clattered down like  leaves, commented like a stolid Daoist philosopher: “Cyclones come, cyclones  go.” His deep knowledge and unflappable demeanor combined to make him  a local legend. 

Lanka’s early years are as instructive regarding traditional Vedic education  as those of Baballa. Born and raised in Nedunuru village, he became a student  of Baballa’s father in Mukkamala. It was an arduous, disciplined routine for  a small boy. He rose at 3 am for a two-mile walk in the dark on a dirt path to  the Bhamidipati house. After a full morning of adhyaya, lunch was served by  Kamesvari, his guru’s wife, followed by the long afternoon review of morning  lessons. After sandhya-vandana at dusk was the walk home, again in the dark,  for supper from his mother and bed at 8 pm. “My father always taught me two 

[[100]]

sloka before I could lie down to sleep.” All his life Lanka kept to this routine  so well established in his brahmacarin period, “except,” he commented in his  declining days, “in recent years I don’t need as much sleep, so I wake at 2:00,  stay in bed till 3:00 while others sleep, and I listen to the day begin.” After six  years in the Bhamidipati house, Lanka proceeded with three years of ghana 

from a second guru, the father of his future son-in-law, still in Mukkamala.  Along with a half dozen other boys he did varalu then, taking his lunch in  seriatim with different village households for a week at a time. 

Marriage for Lanka, as with education, was still within the powerful  Bhamidipati fold. He married Baballa’s cousin Anasuya, age seven, when he  was ten. Lanka’s bride’s father, grandfather, and great-grandfather were all ahi tagni and she was entirely familiar with a patni’s life and responsibilities. After  flowering at fourteen she began her new life with him in Nedunuru village,  where she was to bear a girl, also named Anasuya, and then deliver eight suc cessive boys, one dying in infancy. (See Figure 3.12, Lanka and Anasuya, and  Figure 3.13, Lanka and the author, both Nedunuru 1987.) 

As a child Lanka learned agriculture from his father on land that he would  one day inherit. Among the many shared features in the lives of Baballa  and Lanka was hands-on supervision of crop fields as “gentleman farmers,” 

  

Figure 3.12. Lanka and Anasuya, Lamesvari agrahara, Nedunuru 1987, his books  and ritual charts behind. 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 101   

Figure 3.13. Lanka and author, Nedunuru 1987.

managers of kuli labor crews who did the plowing, harrowing, seeding, trans planting, harvesting, winnowing, bagging, and constant regulation of flowing  water for paddy fields. And both taught their students in shaded spaces among  the coconut palms and small crops interspersed among them, “offices” in the  fields where villagers could also come for muhurta and dharma-sandeha. Field  supervision of the hired crews, whose numbers were expanded by migrant  labor at times of rice and coconut harvests, was “in the old days,” a dawn-to dusk task. In recent years field hands have been unwilling to work such long  hours and foremen have been designated to take over some of the supervision.  Echoing Samavedam’s comment about the insoluble tension between teach ing at home and reciting on the road for money, Lanka recites a sloka to the  effect that krsi (cultivation) impedes Veda, and Veda impedes krsi. “One who  wants to farm cannot be a pandit as well. But in my case,” he adds, “I was for tunate because most of my learning and study was completed before I was in  charge of agricultural duties.” 

His father died in 1947 at age seventy-two when Lanka was thirty-five. He  and Anasuya, along with his mother and others, took the long train journey to  

[[102]]

Kasi to perform sraddha. The property had been divided between Lanka and  his brothers and Lanka received acreage with the high yield of twenty bags  of paddy minimum. Still there were debts, mostly for children’s education.  “My life has never been free of debts,” he remarked matter-of-factly. Rs. 400  katnam (dowry) had been paid long since for the marriage of young Anasuya  to Bhamidipati Mitranarayana of Korumilli, son of an ahitagni and destined to  become the youngest ahitagni in Andhra, perhaps in India. Ironically, then,  it was only this first child, left unmentioned by Lanka when enumerating his  offspring, who directly extended his Vedic heritage into another generation. 

Teaching Veda to the first two sons had been a failure. Anasuya’s terse com ment on child-rearing in a Veda pandit’s house in an agrahara designated for  Veda pandits was caustic: “I brought up our daughter with the ideal of living as  an agni-hotrin’s wife. That worked. He (Lanka) tried to teach Veda to two sons.  That didn’t work.” Baballa’s seemingly iron-clad lineage of soma-sacrificers,  expanding laterally with almost six ahitagni in his own generation, proved  too fragile in his own lifetime, broken by an ill-starred son and then the son less wife to his only remaining grandson. And simultaneously the promise of  Lanka’s continuing Veda legacy, so bright with the production of seven sons  out of eight children, also faded in Lanka’s middle years as he witnessed all  seven enter laukika careers. 

“I had cherished a wonderful dream,” Lanka recounted in our initial 1980  meeting; “four of my sons would know the four Vedas, and the other three  would learn Sastras. But it all came to naught.” In a subsequent interview he  elaborated: “I taught Veda to the first two sons, but both complained, expressed  unwillingness because they would not have salaried careers. So I said to them  ‘Why not be cultivators and Veda pandits?’ But there was pressure from rela 

tives who asked me ‘Why do you keep them captive? Release them! Let them  study what they want, they are good students.’ It was not an easy decision  for me. I made up my mind, sent the first son to a good Brahman family in  Kakinada, a family with ritual purity and traditions maintained. My mother  cooked for him. There he finished high school, went on to Hyderabad to  complete his bachelor’s degree. Grandsons, even more than sons, are further  away, alienated from our tradition. But all sons and grandsons came here to  stay with me for upanayana and to learn to interiorize sandhya-vandana and,”  Lanka added with his special forgiving grace, acknowledging a degree of pride  in his sons’achievements in their non-traditional lives, “to learn to do things  independently.” His last son eventually became the leading comedic actor in  Telugu films. 

A godsend in those early days was the donation of a house and a half-acre  of cropland in a new agrahara founded by Nedunuri Srirama Murti on March 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 103 

4, 1960. It was established not far from Nedunuru village, and he named it  Kamesvari agrahara after his mother. There were only four other houses in  this quiet, isolated enclave in the midst of orchards and paddy fields, none of  them in Veda, although the Chirravuri family did produce Baballa’s favorite  student, Ramam, and later the Sripada family settled in with one son, Manikya,  in Veda. It was the perfect location for Lanka to teach, supervise agriculture on  his seven acres (including those inherited from his father), and write privately  published books and pamphlets on Veda and srauta. Occasionally he would  attend local sabha or take a bus to Rajahmundry and then an east coast train  south to Kanci or Sringeri to participate in discussions of vedartha, the deep  meanings of the Veda. 

Although he seldom commented on it, the percentage of Brahmans in  nearby Nedunuru village steadily shrank over his years of residence in the  agrahara to about 2 or 3 percent, with Scheduled Castes (SCs) and BCs (the  so-called Backward Castes, Settibalijas dominating, followed by Kamsalis,  Devangas, Kummaris, Mangalis, Cakalis, and others) making up a solid major 

ity of the populace. He was acquainted with virtually all the service castes and  the SCs provided his agricultural labor crews. And all recognized him as their  most famous resident. Nedunuru still celebrates two sabha every year, one in  Lanka’s name, the other in the name of Siva, patron deity of the village. 

Before deteriorization of his health, Lanka could talk with endless energy  about the details of any sacrifice or the metastructures of srauta in general.  Of his own ritual life, however, he was extremely reticent. By reconstructing  fragments from many conversations with others, it appears that he hired a  carpenter in Nedunuru village to fashion ritual implements and set fires there  in 1957. He intended to do adhana only, an odd stance since later in life he  insisted that agni-stoma was “incumbent upon every Brahman to remove the  stain of dur-brahmana (being a bad Brahman).” It was Anasuya who later cred ited herself as the motivating force. “She wanted to perform yajna, so she did,”  said daughter-in-law Surya proudly. Allied with Anasuya was their son-in-law  Mitranarayana who actually taunted his elder by caricaturing adhana as insig 

nificant and useless without the follow-up soma-sacrifice. After a three-year  gap, Lanka went back to the carpenter, prepared himself, and performed  agni-stoma in 1960 in the crop fields of Kamesvari agrahara. At that point,  Mitranarayana had gone on to perform sarvato-mukha. 

The narrative of Lanka the unflappable has many contributors. In addi tion to his laconic comment after 160-mile-per-hour winds ravaged his house  and destroyed his son’s house only fifteen feet from his workspace, there  was a time years ago when everyone came to commiserate after unusually  heavy rains washed out much of his cropland. “Oh it’s fine!” said Lanka, “No 

[[104]]

problem.” “He was born with detachment,” commented Duvvuri Yajulu;  “he just doesn’t get involved.” Once during Lanka’s declining years the dora attempted to express sympathy for his three-month stay in a hospital for sur gical removal of a toe following complications from diabetes. It was met with  “Oh, really? I didn’t know about the toe! How did you know?” And when the  supernumerary Sankaracarya of Kancipuram, venerated in South India as if  he were a maha-raja if not a deity, suddenly appeared one day in the tiny agra hara just to see Lanka, not in a palki (palanquin) in the style of his customary  travels with an entourage, but in a car, like a businessman, everyone pressed  him for details on this extraordinary visitation: 

Duvvuri Yajulu (excited): “What did he say?” 

Lanka: “What would he say?” 

D.Y. (awed by the thought): “Did he come in here, right into this very  house?” 

Lanka: “Yes.” 

dora: “What did he say?” 

Lanka: “What would he say?” 

D.Y.: “Did he ask about your health?” 

Lanka: “Ahh” (meaning yes). 

A third visitor: “Did you speak in Sanskrit?” 

Lanka: “No, Telugu.” 

D.Y. (trying one last time): “Was there any message from him?” Lanka: “No. 

And when at another time the dora complained that he was constantly  receiving contradictory and misleading information about srauta perfor mances, Lanka’s acerbic wit had the perfect solution. “Just write,” he coun ciled drily: “sometimes they do rituals, sometimes they don’t.” 

Lanka was much like Baballa in his outspoken distaste for anything that  might smack of veda-vikraya, the selling of the Veda. A year after his death,  Anasuya was asked if she had encouraged Lanka to perform more rituals after  their agni-stoma. Her reply was revealing: “We had our own house and there  was no lack of rtvij for sacrifices,” she said, stating the two most common  excuses for non-performance. “Qualified people were available in Nedunuru  and Sriramapuram, including my younger brothers, Duvvuri Yajulu, even  mature pandits here to study with him. The problem was dabbu (money). Not  enough. It’s all centered on dabbu, soliciting dabbu, collecting dabbu. India  somehow became a dabbu culture. We were content with just doing agni-hotra every day.” And so the pandit most informed about srauta in the entire region 

A Selection of Ahitagni and Other Veda Pandits 105 

was content to be a supervisor and lender of wisdom rather than a sacrifi cer garnering additional titles. And as a director, his reputation and awards  increased as though he had been an actor. When he received the Padma  Bhushan from the president of India on May 7, 1994, he shrugged and said,  “It’s all just propaganda.” 

One of the most appealing aspects of Lanka’s personality was his insatiable  curiosity. He would turn the tables on the dora in the midst of detailed expla nations of soma pounding, for example, and suddenly engage in a long discus sion of karma or God (bhagavantudu or devudu in Telugu), evil, and freedom in  human action. Frequently, observing evangelicals among the Scheduled Caste  hamlets, he asked about Christianity. Once he presented a startling query  without a hint of mischief: “How are George and Victoria?” Did he think that  Queen Victoria (died 1901) and King George VI (emperor of India until 1947,  king of Great Britain until his death in 1952) had retired to watch history from  the bleachers? Quite possibly he meant to imply that nothing of significance  happened in the twentieth century. 

When his swollen legs failed him in 1991 and he could do only the man tras for agni-hotra, no longer able to get up for kriya, he joked: “Quite a trio of  ahitagni we are: Baballa has no ears, Yajulu no eyes, I have no legs.” Assisted  by a son, however, in 1994 he became the only Konasima ahitagni to fly in  an airplane, off to Delhi to accept the presidential citation. Two things con vinced Lanka that he would die in his seventy-second year:  his astrological  mrtyu-cakra (astrological death chart) with a heavy burden of the planet Rahu  on his back, and the deep impression made by his father’s death at that age in  1947. Rahu struck him, he said, with “a fatal illness,” but he was successful in  countering Death with mantras and japa. 

Lanka’s health was not the same again, however, and two years later he  ceased agni-hotra after a thirty-year career. It is called jirnadu, he explained,  being consumed and “digested” by Old Age, by Kala, Time. Like all Veda  pandits he had memorized the haunting refrain that concludes Taittiriya  Upanisad, aham annam aham annam, “I am food, I  am food.” But he was  not yet fully digested. There are provisions, he added, reciting the appropriate  texts, when an ahitagni or patni can no longer maintain requisite strength.  A new mrtyu-cakra prepared in 1988 gave him until age eighty, but this one  was no more accurate than earlier ones and was off by seven years. At his  sahasra-candra darsana, the eightieth birthday celebration for having lived to  see a thousand full moons, he was on the mend from foot surgery and feel ing chipper. At age eighty-three he was teaching Vyakarana to a new graduate  student. “Death is inevitable,” he observed, “but the will to live is strong.” He  did not suddenly drop dead like Cayanulu, or go gentle into that good night106 vedic voices 

like Baballa and Duvvuri Yajulu, but endured through considerable suffering,  including the loss of his memory, for his final two years. He died at 1:03 pm on  Sunday June 20, 1999, age eighty-seven. 

The 1995 cyclone severely damaged the house in Kamesvari agrahara where Lanka and Anasuya raised their eight children. Immediately opposite  on the narrow lane, a similar house was occupied by their fourth son, the one  to whom Lanka had turned over crop cultivation in 1988 and one who had pre viously been president of the agricultural co-op of Nedunuru and two adjacent  villages. After the cyclone, that frame house was rebuilt on a new concrete  slab and there Anasuya lived out her days. The old house of the greater part of  seventy years of married life was boarded up in 1999, opened only for masika,  the monthly sraddha for Lanka. Not until his anniversary sraddha could the  house once again be considered for another’s habitation. In 2000 it was too  soon said Anasuya with a clear, bright face: “Too many memories.” 

As with Lanka, her final years were difficult, and when visited in March  2005 she was unable to rise from her blanket on the floor or recognize anyone,  not even the son and daughter-in-law who cared for her. She seemed then to  be playing Lady Macbeth, mumbling worriedly, endlessly tugging something,  imaginary rings perhaps, from the fingers of one hand, then reversing to wring  out the five fingers of the other hand. Finally, she would rise from her blanket  with sudden energy and shout “Agni-hotra! Agni-hotra!” She breathed her last  on the final day of the year, December 31, 2005, at 2:30 in the afternoon, having  lived to the age of ninety, longer than anyone known to her lineage. 